                                                                                                                 hep-th/0301139
                                                                                                                 TIFR/TH/02-34




                                             Compactification with Flux on K3 and Tori
arXiv:hep-th/0301139v3 17 Jun 2003




                                                                Prasanta K. Tripathy 1 and Sandip P. Trivedi 2

                                                                   Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
                                                                Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, INDIA

                                           We study compactifications of Type IIB string theory on a K3 × T 2 /Z2 orientifold
                                     in the presence of RR and NS flux. We find the most general supersymmetry preserving,
                                     Poincare invariant, vacua in this model. All the complex structure moduli and some of
                                     the Kähler moduli are stabilised in these vacua. We obtain in an explicit fashion the
                                     restrictions imposed by supersymmetry on the flux, and the values of the fixed moduli.
                                     Some T-duals and Heterotic duals are also discussed, these are non-Calabi-Yau spaces. A
                                     superpotential is constructed describing these duals.




                                     February 2003
                                       1
                                           prasanta@theory.tifr.res.in
                                       2
                                           sandip@tifr.res.in
1. Introduction

    Compactifications of String Theory in the presence of flux have attracted considerable
attention lately [1–27]. These compactifications are of interest from several different points
of view. Phenomenologically they are attractive because turning on flux typically leads to
fewer moduli, and also because flux leads to warping which is of interest in the Randall
Sundrum scenario, [28,14]. Cosmologically they are worth studying because the resulting
potential in moduli space could lead to interesting dynamics. From a more theoretical
view point these models enlarge the class of susy preserving vacua in string theory and
one hopes this will improve our understanding of N = 1 string theory.
    In this paper, we will study type IIB string theory in the presence of flux. General
considerations pertaining to this case were discussed in [6]. Subsequently, a concrete
example was studied in [9] involving flux compactifications of IIB on an T 6 /Z2 orientifold.
In many ways this paper can be thought of as an continuation of the investigation begun in
[9]. Here we study the next simplest case, where the compactification is on a K3 × T 2 /Z2
orientifold. The purpose behind these investigations is two fold. Qualitatively, one would
like to gain some appreciation for how easy it is to obtain stable supersymmetric vacua
after flux is turned on. This is important, in view of the discussion in [6] which shows
that supersymmetry is generically broken once flux is turned on, and also bearing in mind
that previous attempts to turn on flux have usually lead to unstable vacua with runaway
behaviour [29–31]. Quantitatively, one would like to know how much information can be
obtained about the susy preserving vacua, whether the required non-genericity of the flux
can be spelt out in an explicit manner, and whether the location of the minimum in moduli
space can be determined and the resulting masses of moduli be obtained.
    We will carry out this investigation in detail in this paper. We solve the supersym-
metry conditions explicitly to obtain the general susy preserving vacua in this model. The
main point worth emphasising about our analysis is that we obtain our result without
having to explicitly parametrise the moduli space of complex and Kähler deformations on
K3. Such a parametrisation would both be inelegant and impractical. Instead, by using an
important theorem, called Torelli’s theorem [32], which pertains to the complex structure
of K3, we are able to map the problem of finding susy preserving vacua into a question
of Linear Algebra in the second cohomology group H 2 (K3, R) of K3. This question turns
out to be easy to answer and yields the general susy preserving vacua mentioned above.
    Our analysis allows us to state the required conditions on the flux for a susy preserving
vacuum in a fairly explicit manner. We find that, qualitatively speaking, these conditions

                                              1
are easy to meet, so that several susy preserving vacua exist. The complex structure moduli
are generically completely frozen in these vacua and some but not all of the Kähler moduli
are also fixed. It is quite straightforward to determine in a quantitatively precise manner
the location of the vacua in moduli space.
    This paper is organised as follows. §2 discusses some important preliminary material.
§3 which contains some of the key results of the paper, describes the general strategy
mentioned above for finding supersymmetry preserving vacua. This general discussion is
illustrated by examples in §4 where two cases are discussed in some length.
    The case of N = 2 supersymmetry does not fall within the general discussion of §3
and is analysed in §5 with an example. The resulting moduli spaces of complex and Kähler
deformations are also determined.
    In §6 we construct an interesting infinite family of fluxes, unrelated by duality, all of
which require the same number of D3 branes for tadpole cancellation. We find however
that only one member of this family gives rise to an allowed vacuum.
    Various dual descriptions of the K3×T 2 /Z2 model are discussed in in §7. One and two
                              ′
T-dualities give rise to Type I and Type I descriptions. The latter in turn, after S-duality,
gives rise to models in heterotic string theory. The resulting compactifications are non-
Calabi-Yau spaces in general. An explicit superpotential, which is valid quite generally, is
constructed in these dual descriptions. It depends on various fluxes and certain twists in
the geometry.
    Our methods can be used to provide a general solution for flux compactifications on
T 6 /Z2 considered in [9] as well (building on an approach discussed in that paper). This is
discussed in §8 briefly.
    Finally, some details are discussed in the appendices A, B and C.
    Let us end by commenting that the K3×T 2 /Z2 model with flux, studied in this paper,
has also been analysed in [22]. Various features of the compactification were deduced in
that paper by considering an M-theory lift, and also the heterotic dual was discussed in
some detail [24]. While this manuscript was in preparation we became aware of [33], which
discusses various aspects of Heterotic compactifications with flux in some depth. We thank
the authors for discussion and for keeping us informed of their results prior to publication.

                                             2
2. Background

    Some background material for our investigation is discussed in this section. §2.1
discusses some of the essential features of IIB compactifications with flux, §2.2 gives more
details relevant to the K3 × T 2 /Z2 case. §2.3 discusses some basic facts about K3 that
will be relevant in the discussion below. Finally §2.4 briefly discusses the lifting of open
string moduli.

2.1. IIB compactifications with Flux

    Our starting point is a compactification of IIB string theory on a K3 × T 2 /Z2 orien-
tifold. The orientifold Z2 group is given by {1, Ω(−1)FL R} where R is a reflection which
inverts the two coordinates of the T 2 and Ω and FL stand for orientation reversal in the
world sheet theory and fermion number in the left moving sector respectively. This model
is T-dual to Type I theory on K3 × T 2 which in turn is S-dual to Heterotic on K3 × T 2 .
    The main aim of this paper is to study supersymmetric compactifications after turning
on various NS-NS and R-R fluxes in this background. The general analysis of such flux
compactifications was carried out in [6]. Let us summarise some of their main results here.
    Turning on flux alters the metric of the internal space by an overall warp factor. For
the case at hand this means upto a conformal factor the internal space is still K3 × T 2 /Z2 .
    Define
                                       G3 = F3 − φH3 ,                                   (2.1)

where F3 = dC2 , H3 = dB2 denote the RR and NS three forms and φ = a+i/gs denotes the
axion-dilaton. (Our notation closely follows that of [6], see also [9]). N = 1 supersymmetry
requires that G3 is of type (2, 1) with respect to the complex structure of K3 × T 2 /Z2 ,
i.e. it has index structure [G3 ]ij k̄ where i, j denote holomorphic indices and k̄ an anti
holomorphic index. Furthermore for supersymmetry one needs G3 to be primitive, that is

                                         J ∧ G3 = 0                                      (2.2)

, where J denotes the Kähler two-form on K3 × T 2 /Z2 .
    One of the main motivations for studying compactifications with flux is moduli stabil-
isation. The requirement that G3 is (2, 1) typically completely fixes the complex structure
for the compactification, we will see this in the analysis below for the example at hand. The
primitivity condition (2.2) is automatically met if the compactification is a (conformally)
Calabi-Yau threefold (CY3 ), since there are no non-trivial 5-forms on a CY3 . For K3 × T 2

                                              3
in contrast this condition is not automatic and does impose some restriction on the Kähler
moduli. An important Kähler modulus which is left unfixed is the overall volume. Since
the primitivity condition is unchanged by an overall rescaling J → λJ, it does not lift this
modulus.
      One comment about non-susy vacua is also worth making at this stage. The low-
energy supergravity obtained after turning on flux is of the no-scale type. The flux gives
rise to a potential for the moduli with minima at zero energy. The requirements imposed
by minimising the potential are less restrictive than those imposed by supersymmetry. To
minimise the potential G3 can have components of (2, 1), (0, 3) and (1, 2) type. The (2, 1)
component must be primitive and the (1, 2) component must be of the form J ∧ α where
α is a non-trivial (0, 1) form. We will have more to say about non-susy vacua and the
primitivity condition in §6.

2.2. The K3 × T 2 /Z2 case in more detail.

      It is worth commenting more on some details relevant to the K3 × T 2 /Z2 compactifi-
cation we will study in this paper.
      The first comment relates to tadpole cancellation for various RR fields. Consider first
the 7-brane tadpole. The Z2 orientifold symmetry has 4 fixed points on the T 2 , an O7-
plane is located at each of these fixed points. To cancel the resulting 7−brane charge 16
D7-branes need to be added.
      Next consider the 3-brane tadpole [34]. Both the O7-planes and the D7-branes wrap
the K3 (besides filling spacetime). As a result, it turns out, 2 units of D3 brane charge are
induced on the world volume of each O7-plane and one units of D3 brane charge in each
D7-brane, 1 giving rise to a total of 24 units of three brane charge. This charge needs to
be canceled by adding D3-branes and flux. The relevant formula for tadpole cancellation
then takes the form:
                                      1
                                        Nf lux + ND3 = 24 ,                                (2.3)
                                      2
where
                                         1
                                                    Z
                            Nf lux =                             H3 ∧ F3 .                 (2.4)
                                     (2π)4 (α′ )2       K3×T 2

Note in particular that with our normalisations the integral in (2.4) is over the covering
manifold, before identification under the orientifold Z2 symmetry. Actually, (2.3) is not the
  1
      The simplest way to see this is the following: in F-theory there are no O7 planes. Instead
there are 24 (p, q) 7-branes each of which acquires one unit of 3-brane charge on wrapping K3.

                                               4
most general expression for the tadpole condition, instantons excited in the world volume
of the 7-branes will give rise to 3-brane charge in general. In this paper we will only deal
with the case where these instantons are not excited.
       The second comment pertains to the number of moduli from the closed string sec-
tor present in the model before flux is turned on. In the closed string sector the fields
gM N , C4 , C0 , φ are even under the action of Ω(−1)FL , while B2 , C2 are odd. This means
one gets 4 gauge bosons from B2 and C2 . In addition the metric, and C4 give rise to 61 and
25 scalars respectively, yielding a total of 86 scalars. The resulting compactification has
N = 2 supersymmetry (before flux is turned on) with the gravity multiplet, three vector
multiplets and twenty hypermultiplets. In addition, while we do not provide a precise
count here, there are moduli that arise from the open string sector. These include moduli
due to exciting the gauge fields on the 7 branes, the location of the 7-branes on the T 2
and the locations of the D3 branes in the K3 × T 2 /Z2 .
       Finally, we discuss the quantisation conditions which must be met by the H3 and F3
flux. Due to the discrete identification in the compactification this condition is a bit subtle.
The orientifold K3 × T 2 /Z2 has additional ‘half’ three-cycles not present in the covering
manifold K3 × T 2 . To satisfy the quantisation condition on these three-cycles one requires
that
                             1                          1
                                     Z                          Z
                                           F3 = 2Z ,                    H3 = 2Z,             (2.5)
                          (2π)2 α′       γ           (2π)2 α′       γ

where γ is an arbitrary class of H3 (K3 × T 2 , Z). Other possibilities which include turning
on exotic flux at the O planes were discussed in [10] but will not be explored further here.
       In the discussion below we will explicitly parametrise the fluxes as follows. Choose
coordinate x, y for the T 2 , with 0 ≤ x, y ≤ 1. The flux which is turned on must be
consistent with the orientifold Z2 symmetry. Since B2 and C2 are odd under Ω(−1)FL this
means the allowed F3 and H3 must have two legs along the K3 and one along the T 2 .
That is
                                   1
                                         F3 = αx ∧ dx + αy ∧ dy                              (2.6)
                                (2π)2 α′
                                  1
                                        H3 = βx ∧ dx + βy ∧ dy,                              (2.7)
                               (2π)2 α′
where αx , αy , βx , βy ∈ H 2 (K3, Z). If ei is a basis of H 2 (K3, Z) and αx = αix ei we have tak-
ing into account the quantisation condition that αix is even integer, similarly for αy , βx , βy .

                                                    5
Finally, we note that with our choice of orientation, as explained in App. A, Nf lux (2.4),
takes the form
             Z
    Nf lux = (βx ∧ αy ∧ dx ∧ dy + βy ∧ αx ∧ dy ∧ dx) = (−βx · αy + βy · αx ) .            (2.8)

2.3. Some essential facts about K3

      K3 is the two (complex) dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold. It is Kähler and has SU (2)
holonomy. For an excellent review, see [32] .
      H 2 (K3, R) is 22 dimensional. An inner product can be defined in H 2 (K3, R) as
follows. If ei , ej ∈ H 2 (K3, R)                       Z
                                         (ei , ej ) ≡        ei ∧ ej .                    (2.9)
                                                        K3

This inner product matrix can be shown to have signature (3, 19). H 2 (K3, R) with this
metric can be naturally embedded in R3,19 .
      H 2 (K3, Z), can be thought of as a lattice. It is known to be even and self dual. These
two conditions are highly restrictive. In a particular basis ei (discussed in App. A) the
inner product matrix (2.9), can be shown to have the form, eq. A.3 (App. A) consistent
with these restrictions. We will refer to the lattice, together with this inner product, as
Γ3,19 , below.
      The moduli space of complex structures on K3 is particularly relevant for this paper
since many directions lifted by flux lie in this moduli space. Torelli’s theorem is important
in this context. It says that, upto discrete identifications, the moduli space of complex
structures on K3 is given by the space of possible periods of the holomorphic two-form Ω.
      Decomposing Ω into its real and imaginary parts we have

                                               Ω = x + iy                               (2.10)

where x, y ∈ H 2 (K3, R). Ω satisfies two conditions
                             Z
                                 Ω ∧ Ω = x · x − y · y + 2ix · y = 0 ,                  (2.11)

and                                 Z
                                        Ω ∧ Ω̄ = x · x + y · y > 0 .                    (2.12)

      From (2.11) we see that x, y are orthogonal and from (2.12) that both x, y are spacelike.
So x, y span a space-like two-plane in H 2 (K3, R) or equivalently R3,19 . Changing the

                                                        6
orientation of the two-plane corresponds to taking Ω ↔ Ω̄. The space of possible periods
is then the space of oriented two-planes in R3,19 . This space is called the Grassmanian,

                                G = O(3, 19)+/(O(2) × O(1, 19))+.                           (2.13)

It is twenty (complex) dimensional.
      Next, let us consider the Kähler two-form, J˜ on K3. Since K3 is Kähler, J˜ ∈ H 2 (K3, R).
In addition it satisfies two conditions:
                                             Z
                                                 J˜ ∧ Ω = 0,                                (2.14)

and                                          Z
                                                 J˜ ∧ J˜ > 0.                               (2.15)

With respect to the inner product, (2.9), the first condition tells us that J˜ is orthogonal
to Ω, while the second says that it is a space-like two-form.
      Putting this together with what we learnt above, we see that the choice of a complex
structure and Kähler two-form on K3 specifies an oriented space-like three-plane Σ in
H 2 (K3, R) ∈ R3,19 . The Einstein metric is completely specified once this choice is made.
It is then easy to see that the moduli space of Einstein metrics on K3, upto discrete
identifications, is of the form

                             ME ≃ O + (3, 19)/(SO(3) × O(19)) × R+ .                        (2.16)

This is 58 real dimensional 2 .
      Finally, we will work in the supergravity approximation in this paper. With that
in mind, it will be useful to know in the following discussion when the the moduli are
stabilised at a point away from an orbifold singularity of K3. Theorem 4 in [32] tells us
that this condition is met if the space-like three plane Σ is not orthogonal to any Lattice
Vector 3 of Γ3,19 .
  2
      Different choices of an oriented two-plane in the chosen three-plane give rise to different
complex structures consistent with the same Einstein metric. This is a reflection of the underlying
Hyper Kähler geometry.
  3
      In terms of the basis ei , a Lattice Vector is of form, ni ei , ni ∈ Z.

                                                    7
2.4. Open String Moduli

     Most of this paper deals with closed string moduli. Before going on though it is worth
briefly commenting on open string moduli. These moduli are of two kinds. If D3-branes
are present, their location in the K3 × T 2 /Z2 space gives rise to moduli. Turning on flux
does not freeze these fields as long as the conditions for supersymmetry are met, this can
be easily seen from the supersymmetry analysis, [35].
     The second kind of open string moduli are the location of the D7- branes in the
transverse T 2 directions. There are 16 such branes present. In the analysis below we take
them to be symmetrically distributed so that each O7 plane has 4 D7 branes on it. As a
result the dilaton will be constant (except for the singularities at the D7/O7 planes). We
then consistently seek solutions which meet the conditions for supersymmetry, discussed
in §2.1.
     Perturbing around such a solution, one can show that generically the 7-brane moduli
are lifted. There are two ways to see this. From the point of view of ten-dimensional IIB
theory, this happens because of the restrictive nature of the (2, 1) condition that G3 must
satisfy. Note that this condition must be met at every point in the compactification. Once
the D7-branes move away from the O7-planes, the dilaton varies and the (2, 1) condition
will not be met generically. From the F-theory viewpoint this can be understood similarly
as a consequence of the restrictive nature of the (2, 2) condition that G4 must satisfy. It
is easy to see that any susy solution with constant dilaton in the IIB theory lifts to a susy
preserving solution of F-theory with G4 being of type (2, 2) and primitive. Now the (2, 2)
condition imposes strong constraints on the complex structure moduli and in fact over
determines them. As a result, perturbing around a given solution we generically do not
expect any complex structure moduli to survive. From the IIB perspective this means all
the D7-brane moduli as well as the dilaton and the complex structure of the T 2 should be
fixed.
     Let us end by commenting that some of these issues are discussed in more detail, from
the perspective of the Heterotic theory, in [33].


3. Supersymmetric Vacua

     In the following two sections we solve the conditions imposed by supersymmetry and
find the general supersymmetric vacua for flux compactifications on K3 × T 2 /Z2 . Since
the discussion is quite technical it is helpful to first summarise the key ideas.

                                              8
    The conditions imposed by supersymmetry are well known. The flux, G3 , should be
of type (2, 1) and it should satisfy the requirement of primitivity.
    The main challenge is to explicitly implement these conditions and find susy preserving
vacua. The (2, 1) condition in particular is very restrictive, and, as we shall see below,
cannot be met for generic fluxes. In finding the general supersymmetric solutions we will
determine both the allowed flux and the resulting susy vacua. A brute force approach,
relying on an explicit parametrisation of moduli space, is not practical for this purpose.
For example, the complex structure moduli space of K3 is 20 dimensional and not easy to
explicitly parametrise.
    The key to making progress is Torelli’s theorem for K3, which we discussed in §2.3
above. This theorem allows us to restate the search for susy solutions as a problem in
Linear Algebra in H 2 (K3, R). Seeking a complex structure in which the flux is of type
(2, 1) translates to searching for an appropriate space-like two-plane in H 2 (K3, R). The
restrictive nature of the (2, 1) condition, which we mentioned above, can now be turned
into an advantage. The flux defines a four dimensional subspace of H 2 (K3, R), which we
denote as Vf lux . Susy requires that the two-plane must lie in Vf lux . This is itself a big
simplification since it narrows the search from the 22 dimensional space, H 2 (K3, R), to a
four dimensional one. But in fact one can do even better. One finds that the (2, 1) con-
dition determines the two-plane completely in terms of the dilaton-axion and the complex
structure modulus of the T 2 . The remaining conditions then determine these two moduli
and provide some of the required conditions on the flux.
    Turning next to the requirement of primitivity, which is a condition on the Kähler
two-form, one finds it maps to the search for a space-like vector in H 2 (K3, R) which
is orthogonal to Vf lux . Unlike in the case of the complex structure, this is not a very
restrictive condition. It does impose some additional conditions on the flux, but once
these conditions are met, many solutions exist in which some but not all Kähler moduli
are frozen.
    In this way we determine the most general susy preserving solutions for flux compact-
ifications on K3 × T 2 /Z2 .
    The rest of this section will present the analysis sketched out above in more detail.
In §3.1 we discuss the (2, 1) condition. We show that it determines the complex structure
of K3 in terms of the dilaton-axion and the complex structure of the T 2 . We also find
the constraints it imposes on these two moduli and on the flux. In §3.2 we solve these

                                              9
constraints explicitly and determine the complex structure of K3, T 2 and the dilaton-
axion. We also make the constraints on the flux explicit. In §3.3 we discuss the primitivity
condition. We determine the restrictions it imposes on the Kähler moduli and on the flux.
Finally, we summarise the results of this section in §3.4 stating the resulting values of
the complex structure moduli, the restrictions on the Kähler moduli, and the conditions
imposed on the flux for susy preserving vacua.

3.1. The (2, 1) Condition

     We start by considering the restrictions imposed by the condition that G3 is of type
(2, 1).
     One way to formulate these conditions is to construct the superpotential [1,6],
                                           Z
                                     W =        G3 ∧ Ω3                                (3.1)

which is a function of all the complex structure moduli and also of the axion-dilaton. One
can show then that imposing the conditions:

                                      W = ∂i W = 0,                                    (3.2)

where i denotes any complex structure modulus or the dilaton field, ensures that G3 is
purely of type (2, 1). Notice that we have one more condition than variables in (3.2) .
Two conclusions follow from this. First, as was mentioned above, we see that for generic
fluxes there are no susy preserving minima. Second, we learn that in the class of fluxes
which preserve susy generically all complex structure moduli are stabilised. In finding
susy solutions we will determine below what conditions the flux must satisfy along with
the resulting values for the complex structure moduli and the dilaton.
     A straightforward way to proceed, as followed in [9], is to explicitly parametrise the
complex structure moduli space, determine W , and then search for solutions. For the
case at hand, this is not very practical. The main complication is the complex structure
moduli space of K3. An explicit parametrisation of the twenty dimensional Grassmanian
is possible, but the resulting expressions are quite unwieldy.
     The crucial idea which allows us to make progress is Torelli’s theorem, as was men-
tioned above. We are seeking a complex structure, with respect to which G3 is of type
(2, 1). Torelli’s theorem states that the complex structure is specified by a space-like two

                                               10
plane in H 2 (K3, R). We can think of this two-plane as determining the holomorphic two-
form Ω and from it the complex structure. With this in mind we recast the search for
the required complex structure in terms of conditions on the two-plane. Fortunately, as
we see below, these conditions are simple to state and restrictive enough to determine the
two-plane without requiring an explicit parametrisation of the complex structure moduli
space of K3.
       We begin by choosing the complex structure modulus on the T 2 to be τ , so that we
can define complex coordinates on it of the form,


                                  z = x + τ y , z̄ = x + τ̄ y .                           (3.3)


In (2.6),(2.7), we defined four vectors, {αx , αy , βx , βy } ∈ H 2 (K3, Z) ⊂ H 2 (K3, R) which
specify the three-form flux completely. We will refer to these as the flux vectors below.
Together they define a subspace of H 2 (K3, R) which we call Vf lux . G3 can then be written
as
                                     G3 = nx dx + ny dy ,                                 (3.4)

where the 2-forms nx , ny are given by


                              nx ≡ αx − φβx , ny ≡ αy − φβy .                             (3.5)


In terms of the complex coordinates on the T 2 , (3.3), we can express G3 as

                                          1
                                G3 =          (Gz dz + Gz̄ dz̄)                           (3.6)
                                       τ̄ − τ

with
                                       Gz = (nx τ̄ − ny )                                 (3.7)

and
                                     Gz̄ = −(nx τ − ny ) .                                (3.8)

       For G3 to be of (2, 1)-type the two form Gz̄ in K3 must be of type (2, 0). Since the
Holomorphic two-form is unique we learn that


                                          Gz̄ = c Ω,                                      (3.9)

                                               11
where c is a constant. We must emphasise that (3.9) determines the complex structure of
K3 completely in terms of the flux, and the moduli, φ, τ (which enter in (3.8)) 4 . Eq.(3.9),
will play a central role in the discussion below.
      Now we can use the remaining conditions imposed by susy and consistency to de-
termine the remaining two moduli, the dilaton-axion and τ , and also obtain the required
conditions which should be satisfied by the non-generic flux for a susy condition to exist.
      From (2.11) we see that the following condition must hold:

                                            Gz̄ · Gz̄ = 0.                                     (3.10)

      Two other conditions arise as follows. For G3 to be of type (2, 1) we see from (3.7),
that Gz must be of type (1, 1). This means

                                            Ω · Gz = 0 ,                                       (3.11)

and
                                            Ω · Ḡz = 0 ,                                      (3.12)

which can be reexpresed as
                                            Gz̄ · Gz = 0                                       (3.13)

and
                                            Gz̄ · Ḡz = 0.                                     (3.14)

      One final condition arises from the requirement that the two-plane defining Ω is space-
like, (2.12). From (3.9), it takes the form:

                                            Gz̄ · Ḡz̄ > 0.                                    (3.15)

      We see that, (3.10),(3.13), and, (3.14), are three polynomial equations in two variables,
φ and τ . Generically they will not have a solution. This was expected from our discussion
of the superpotential at the beginning of this section. Two of these equations can be used
to solve for φ, and τ . The third equation then gives two real conditions on the flux. Finally,
we also need to ensure that the flux meets the inequality (3.15).

  4
      We will assume in this section that Gz̄ is non-zero, so that the constant c in (3.9)is non-zero.
The case where Gz̄ = 0 is dealt with separately in §5.

                                                  12
3.2. Solving the Equations

      In this section we discuss in more detail how to explicitly solve the three equations,
(3.14),(3.10), (3.15), which were obtained above from the (2, 1) requirement.
      These equations can be written as

                                   (n̄x τ − n̄y ) · (nx τ − ny ) = 0                           (3.16a)

                                   (nx τ̄ − ny ) · (nx τ − ny ) = 0                             (3.16b)

                                   (nx τ − ny ) · (nx τ − ny ) = 0 .                            (3.16c)

      We will in particular be interested in non-singular solutions for which Imφ, Imτ 6= 0.
Since, Imτ 6= 0, (3.16b), (3.16c), give

                                        nx · (nx τ − ny ) = 0,                                   (3.17)

and
                                        ny · (nx τ − ny ) = 0.                                   (3.18)

Similarly, since, Imφ 6= 0 (3.16a), (3.16c), give

                                  (αx τ − αy ) · (nx τ − ny ) = 0 .                              (3.19)

      Using (3.17) we can eliminate τ from the remaining two equations to get,


                                (nx · nx )(ny · ny ) − (nx · ny )2 = 0                         (3.20a)

 (αx · nx )(nx · ny )2 − (nx · nx )(nx · ny ) (αx · ny + αy · nx ) + (αy · ny )(nx · nx )2 = 0 . (3.20b)

      Using the expressions for nx and ny from (3.5) this yields two polynomials, one quartic
and the other quintic in φ, of the form:


                               q1 φ4 + q2 φ3 + q3 φ2 + q4 φ + q5 = 0 ,                         (3.21a)

                          p1 φ5 + p2 φ4 + p3 φ3 + p4 φ2 + p5 φ + p6 = 0,                        (3.21b)

where the coefficients qi , pi , are real and can be expressed in terms of inner products of
the flux vectors, as is discussed in App. B.

                                                  13
    For a non-singular solution, φ, must be complex. Since the coefficients of the two
polynomials are real this means that (3.21a), (3.21b), must share a common quadratic
factor.
    In general, as is discussed in App. B this happens when the following condition is
met: Define the matrix

                                p1    0    0    −q1    0      0     0
                                                                      
                               p2    p1   0    −q2   −q1     0     0 
                                p3    p2   p1   −q3   −q2    −q1    0 
                                                                      
                       
                                p4    p3   p2   −q4   −q3    −q2   −q1 
                                                                      
                    M ≡                                                .             (3.22)
                       
                               p5    p4   p3   −q5   −q4    −q3   −q2 
                                p6    p5   p4    0    −q5    −q4   −q3 
                                                                      
                       
                                0     p6   p5    0     0     −q5   −q4
                                                                      
                                0     0    p6    0     0      0    −q5

    Then (3.21a),(3.21b), have a common quadratic factor, if M has a zero eigenvalue.
That is if a non-zero column vector X exists such that

                                      M · X ≡ Mji X j = 0.                             (3.23)

Note that since M is an 8 × 7 matrix, each column of M can be thought of as a vector in
an 8 dimensional vector space. Then (3.23), is equivalent to requiring that only 6 of these
7 vectors, in the 8 dimensional space, are linearly independent.
    Before proceeding let us emphasise that the matrix M depends only on the flux vectors,
so the requirement of a zero eigenvalue gives rise to restrictions on the flux which must be
met for a susy solution to exist.
    Once condition (3.23) is met, the resulting common quadratic factor has the form

                                    W (φ) = w1 φ2 + w2 φ + w3                          (3.24)

where
                                q1        s1 q2 − s2 q1        q5
                         w1 =      , w2 =        2      , w3 =    ,                    (3.25)
                                s1              s1             s3
and s1 , s2 , s3 refer to the first three components of X as is explained in App. B.
    We can now finally solve for φ by setting W (φ) = 0. This gives,
                                                p
                                       −w2 ±      w22 − 4w1 w3
                                 φ=                            .                       (3.26)
                                                 2w1

                                                14
    For a nonsingular solution, the imaginary part of φ, must not vanish. This gives the
following additional conditions on the flux,


                                             w22 < 4w1 w3 .                                    (3.27)


    Once φ is determined, τ can be obtained from (3.17). It is given by

                                                   nx · ny
                                              τ=           .                                   (3.28)
                                                   nx · nx

We should note that in case nx · nx = 0, (3.28), is not valid. Instead one can use (3.16a),
which yields,


                                        p
             (n̄x · ny + n̄y · nx ) ±    (n̄x · ny + n̄y · nx )2 − 4(n̄x · nx )(n̄y · ny )
        τ=                                                                                 .   (3.29)
                                             2(n̄x · nx )

(Requiring Im(τ ) > 0 fixes the sign ambiguity in (3.29).) Eq. (3.29), is also useful for
stating an additional condition on the flux which arises from the requirement that Imτ 6= 0.
This condition takes the form


                          (n̄x · ny + n̄y · nx )2 < 4(n̄x · nx )(n̄y · ny ) ,                  (3.30)

where φ, is given in (3.26).
    Finally a condition on the flux arises from (3.15). Using (3.9), this takes the form,


                                  (nx τ − ny ) · (n̄x τ̄ − n̄y ) > 0 ,                         (3.31)


with τ and φ given in terms of the flux, in (3.28), (3.26).
    In summary, the (2, 1) condition determines the complex structure of the K3 × T 2 /Z2
space completely in a susy preserving solution. The dilaton-axion, φ, and the complex
structure modulus of the T 2 , τ , are given by (3.26), (3.28). The complex structure of K3
is determined implicitly by Ω which is given by (3.9). In addition the following conditions
are imposed on the flux: the matrix M (3.22) must have a zero eigenvector, and the
conditions (3.27), (3.30), and (3.31), must hold.

                                                    15
3.3. Primitivity

      We turn next to the requirements imposed by the primitivity condition.
      On K3 × T 2 , the Kähler two-form, J, is given by 5

                                                            ¯
                                        J = J˜ + gz z̄ dz ∧ dz,                          (3.32)

where z, z̄ denote coordinates on the T 2 and J˜ ∈ H (1,1) (K3).
    The primitivity condition is (2.2). From the form of G3 we see that there are no
                                                                                          ˜ in
constraints on gz z̄ , so the Kähler modulus of the T 2 is not fixed. The constraints on J,
terms of the inner product, (2.9), take the form,

                                        J˜ · Gz = J˜ · Gz̄ = 0.                          (3.33)

Since Im(τ ), Im(φ) 6= 0, for a non-singular solution, we learn from (3.5) that

                               J˜ · αx = J˜ · αy = J˜ · βx = J˜ · βy = 0.                (3.34)

Thus J˜ must be orthogonal to the vector space Vf lux .
    An acceptable J˜ must meet the following two additional conditions. It should be a
space-like, i.e., positive norm vector in H 2 (K3, R). And, it should be of type (1, 1). This
latter condition can be stated as follows:

                                         J˜ · Ω = J˜ · Ω̄ = 0.                           (3.35)

From (3.9), we see that (3.35), is automatically met if (3.34), is true. This leaves the
two conditions of J˜ being space-like and orthogonal to Vf lux . Since H 2 (K3, R) is 22
dimensional, at first glance, it would seem that these conditions can be met for generic
fluxes, leaving 18 of the K3 Kähler moduli unfixed.
      Some thought shows that this is not true and that in fact the flux must meet some
conditions in general. The metric on H 2 (K3, R) gives rise to an inner product matrix
in Vf lux in an obvious manner. It is convenient to state the restrictions on the flux, in
terms of the number of non-trivial eigenvectors, with positive, negative and null norm,
of this matrix. One can show, as we will argue below, that the number of positive norm
  5
      For ease in subsequent discussion, we drop the overall factor of i, that is conventionally
present in the definition of J .

                                                  16
eigenvectors must be 2 and the number of null eigenvectors must be 0, for a non-trivial
space-like J˜ to exist that meets, (3.34). This leaves the following three possibilities:
      a) dim Vf lux = 2, (2+, 0−)
      b) dim Vf lux = 3, (2+, 1−)
      c) dim Vf lux = 4, (2+, 2−),
where in our notation (2+, 1−) means two eigenvectors of positive norm and one of negative
norm etc.
      In the next two paragraphs we pause to discuss how this conclusion comes about.
Thereafter we return to the main thread of the argument again. Since Ω lies in Vf lux and
is space-like, the number of positive-norm eigenvectors must be at least two. Since the
signature of H 2 (K3, R) is (3, 19) the maximum number of positive norm eigenvectors can
be three. But if it is three then J˜ cannot be orthogonal to Vf lux and still be spacelike 6 .
Thus, there must be exactly two spacelike eigenvectors in Vf lux .
      Next, we turn to the number of eigenvectors with null norm. Any such eigenvector
must be orthogonal to the two eigenvectors with positive eigenvalues. So if such an eigen-
vector exists, and J˜ is orthogonal to it, besides being orthogonal to the two space-like
vectors, one can again show that it cannot be space-like 7 .
      The argument in the previous two paragraphs shows that Vf lux must meet one of the
three possibilities discussed above. Once the flux meets this requirement, the condition
                                         ˜ Since (3.34), imposes 4 conditions this leaves 18
(3.34), can be satisfied by a space-like J.
moduli in the K3 Kähler moduli space, besides the Kähler modulus of the T 2 , unfixed.
      Orbifold Singularities
      There is one final point we should discuss in this section. This is concerned with
the existence of an orbifold singularity on the K3 surface. At such a singularity various
two-cycles shrink to zero size and additional light states obtained by branes wrapping
such cycles can enter the low energy theory. Since we work with a supergravity theory
without these states, our analysis of the resulting vacuum is self-consistent only if it does
not contain any such light state.
  6
    One can construct a basis of H 2 (K3, R), starting from these three spacelike vectors and
appending 19 time-like vectors to them. Then if J˜ is orthogonal to the three spacelike ones it
must be purely time like.
  7
     Let the two spacelike vectors be v1 , v2 and the null vector be vN = v3 + v4 , where v3 is
spacelike and v4 is time like. Then orthogonality would require that J˜ = vN + vt , where vt is a
time like vector orthogonal to v1 , v2 , vN . This makes J˜ time-like.

                                                  17
        Usually in string theory at an orbifold point additional light states are avoided by
giving an expectation value to the axionic partner of the blow-up mode of the vanishing
two-cycle. In our constructions we do not always have the freedom to turn on such an ex-
pectation value, since the Kähler mode corresponding to blowing up the cycle is sometimes
lifted. In such cases the axionic partner is also lifted, typically this happens because it is
eaten by some Gauge Boson, in the low-energy gauged supergravity. It is an interesting
question to ask what are the masses of states which arise from wrapped branes in such a
case, but we have not investigated this yet.
        To avoid these complications we will mainly only consider vacua below which lie away
from an orbifold singularity or if at an orbifold, where the relevant blow up modes are not
lifted. Two exceptions to this are the discussion towards the end of §4.1 which describes a
solution generating technique that could have wider applicability, and §5 which discusses
N = 2 solutions. The N = 2 vacua could prove useful in determining modifications to the
BPS formulae for wrapped branes in the gauged supergravity obtained after turning on
flux.
        The rest of this subsection analyses how to determine if a solution contains an orbifold
singularity.
        One can show that the susy preserving conditions discussed above result in an orbifold
singularity iff Vf lux contains a Lattice Vector v of Γ3,19 , which is orthogonal to Ω. If no
such Lattice Vector exists, one can always choose the Kähler two form J˜ consistent with
the primitivity conditions, to avoid an orbifold.
        To see this we recall from §2 that the K3 surface is at an orbifold point in its moduli
space if a Lattice Vector of Γ3,19 exists which is orthogonal to the three plane Σ, that
determines the Einstein Metric. Now if a Lattice Vector v exists which is orthogonal to
Ω and v ∈ Vf lux , it must be orthogonal to J˜ (due to the primitivity condition (3.34) ).
Thus it must be orthogonal to Σ, so as claimed above the K3 surface is at an orbifold
singularity. For the converse we need to consider two possibilities. Either there exists no
Lattice Vector orthogonal to Ω, in this case we are done. Or there is such a Lattice Vector
                                                                           ˜ consistent with
v but it does not lie in Vf lux . In this case one can always arrange that J,
the condition, (3.34), is not orthogonal to v, so again an orbifold is avoided 8 .

  8
      Decompose v = vk +v⊥ , where vk lies in Vf lux , and v⊥ is perpendicular to Vf lux . By orienting
J˜ to have a (”small enough”) component along v⊥ one can then ensure that J˜· v 6= 0, while (3.34),
and positivity of J˜ are met.

                                                  18
3.4. Summary of Conditions Leading to Susy Solutions

     The discussion of this section has been quite technical and detailed. It is therefore
useful to summarise the main results here for further reference.
     Susy is generically broken for flux compactifications of IIB theory on K3 × T 2 /Z2 . To
preserve susy the flux must meet the following conditions: First, the vector space Vf lux
spanned by the flux must be of one of the three classes, a,b,or c, discussed above in the
primitivity section. Second, the matrix M , (3.22), formed from the flux, must have a zero
eigenvalue.
     Once these conditions are met a solution exists. The dilaton, φ, is given by (3.26), and
in terms of φ the complex structure modulus of the T 2 , τ , is given by (3.28). The complex
structure of the K3 is implicitly determined by Ω which is give by (3.9) in terms of φ, τ .
Unlike the complex structure, the Kähler moduli are not completely determined. Instead
the Kähler two-form of K3 must meet four conditions, (3.34). This generically leaves an
18 dimensional subspace of the K3 Kähler moduli space, and the Kähler modulus of the
T 2 , unfixed.
     Finally, in order to ensure that the resulting solution is non-singular some additional
conditions must be met by the flux. To ensure that the complex structure moduli are
stabilised at non-singular values, the inequalities, (3.31), (3.27), and (3.30), must be met.
And to ensure that orbifold singularities are avoided in the resulting solution, Vf lux must
not contain any Lattice Vector of Γ3,19 , which is orthogonal to Ω.
     One final comment. Our approach to finding susy preserving solutions above relied
crucially on the fact that the constant c in (3.9), did not vanish. If this constant is zero
the holomorphic two-form of K3 is not constrained to lie in Vf lux . This second branch of
solutions will be considered further in §5, it gives rise to N = 2 susy preserving vacua.



4. Some Examples

     Here we will illustrate the general discussion of the preceding section with a few
examples. §4.1 discusses the case where Vf lux is two dimensional. We consider the general
solution, some examples and also discuss a method of generating additional susy preserving
solutions starting from an existing one. §4.2 applies the general discussion above to an
example where Vf lux is four dimensional.

                                             19
4.1. Vf lux has Dimension 2:

    In this case only two of the four flux vectors are linearly independent. Since Ω must be
a two-plane contained in Vf lux , this means both vectors spanning Vf lux must be spacelike,
so that Vf lux is of type (2+, 0−). In this case the two-plane defined by Ω must be Vf lux .
    Going back to the conditions for G3 to be of type (2, 1) one finds from (3.11), and
(3.12), that
                                      Gz · Ω = Gz · Ω̄ = 0 .                             (4.1)

Since, in this case, Vf lux is spanned by Ω, Ω̄, this means from (4.1), that

                                       Gz = nx τ̄ − ny = 0.                              (4.2)

Since Imτ 6= 0 for a non-singular solution, we learn from (3.10), that

                                           nx · nx = 0,                                  (4.3)

which can be rewritten as

                           (αx · αx ) − 2(αx · βx )φ + (βx · βx )φ2 = 0 .

Solving for φ we obtain
                         1                   p
                                                         2
                                                                                 
                  φ=              (αx · βx ) ± (αx · βx ) − (αx · αx )(βx · βx )         (4.4)
                     (βx · βx )

Imφ 6= 0 implies (αx · βx )2 < (αx · αx )(βx · βx ) . So the vectors αx and βx must be linearly
independent.
    With φ fixed, (4.2), is two complex equations in τ , one of these can be used to
determine τ , the other then gives two real conditions on the flux. Multiplying both sides
of (4.2) by n̄x we have that
                                                  ny · n̄x
                                           τ̄ =            ,                             (4.5)
                                                  nx · n̄x
or equivalently
                                                  n̄y · nx
                                           τ=              .                             (4.6)
                                                  nx · n̄x
Multiplying (4.2) by nx gives
                                           nx · ny = 0 ,                                 (4.7)

substituting for φ, τ from (4.4), (4.6), in (4.7), we get the two conditions on the flux
mentioned above. Finally we note that since Ω, is a spacelike two plane by construction in

                                                  20
this case, the inequality (3.31) is automatically met. Also since Ω spans Vf lux , the moduli
of K3 can be chosen to be away from an orbifold point.
      Next we turn to primitivity (3.34), which requires that J˜ is orthogonal to the vector
space Vf lux . In the present example, this condition does not yield any extra restrictions
on the flux. It can be met easily. H 2 (K3, R) is 22 dimensional. (3.34), imposes two
conditions allowing for all twenty Kähler moduli of K3, and the one Kähler modulus of
the T 2 , to vary.
      As a concrete example consider the case where αx , βx are the two linearly independent
flux vectors, with
                                  αy = −βx and βy = αx .                                (4.8)

In addition take the flux to satisfy the conditions

                                          α2x = βx2 ,                                   (4.9)

and
                                         αx · βx = 0 .                                (4.10)

      From (4.4), one finds then that the dilaton is stabilised at the value

                                           φ = ±i .                                   (4.11)

Taking φ = i from (4.6), we have that

                                            τ =i.                                     (4.12)

We see that with this choice of flux, (4.7), is automatically met. As mentioned above in
this case, Ω corresponds to the two plane spanned by αx , βx .
      Next we come to the tadpole conditions. From (2.8), and (4.8), we see that Nf lux is
given by
                                        Nf lux = 2α2x ,                               (4.13)

so that the D3 brane tadpole condition takes the form

                                      α2x + ND3 = 24 .                                (4.14)

This condition can be easily met.

                                              21
    As a specific illustration, we take, in the notation of App. A,

                                    αx = 2e1 , βx = 2e2 ,                               (4.15)

so that conditions (4.9),(4.10), are met (the even coefficients in (4.15), ensure the correct
quantisation conditions). We then have that

                                       ND3 = 24 − 8 = 16,                               (4.16)

number of branes must be added in the compactification. Let us end by mentioning that
in this example, (4.15), primitivity requires the Kähler two-form of K3 to be of the form
                                                 22
                                                 X
                                          J˜ =         ti ei ,
                                                 i=3

where the real parameters ti are chosen to make J · J > 0. This is a twenty dimensional
space, as was mentioned above.
    New Solutions from Old
    The case where dim(Vf lux ) = 2 also allows us to illustrate a trick which is sometimes
helpful in finding additional solutions to the susy conditions. The idea is as follows: Given
a set of flux vectors which give rise to a susy solution, one can try to alter the flux vectors
in such a manner that we keep the dilaton and complex structure of both the K3 and T 2
unchanged. In particular this means keeping Gz̄ unchanged (3.9). Let the αx → αx + δαx
etc. Then we have that
                                   δGz̄ = δnx τ − δny = 0.                              (4.17)

Since Gz must still be of type (1, 1) for preserving susy we have that

                                   δGz · Ω = δGz · Ω̄ = 0.                              (4.18)

This yields from (3.9), (4.17), that

                                   δnx · Ω = δnx · Ω̄ = 0.                              (4.19)

If a δnx can be found, consistent with the quantisation conditions on the flux, (2.5), that
satisfies (4.19), then (4.17)can be solved for δny . In some cases, as we now illustrate, δny
is also consistent with the quantisation conditions. In this case, subject to the primitiv-
ity condition and the D3 brane tadpole condition (2.3) also being met, one can obtain
additional susy preserving solutions.

                                                 22
        As an example consider the set of flux, (4.8), discussed in the previous section. In this
example to begin with, dim.Vf lux = 2, and φ = τ = i in the susy vacuum. Now suppose
the flux is changed so that δαx , δβx are both orthogonal to αx , βx . In addition we assume
that
                                            δαy = δβx ,                                   (4.20)

and
                                           δβy = −δαx .                                   (4.21)

It is easy to then see that both (4.17) and (4.18) are met. For the new flux dimVf lux > 2,
so the primitivity condition can also be met if δαx , δβx are both time like.
        Let us end with two comments.
        First, the change in Nf lux is given by

                                δNf lux = −(δβx · δαy ) + δβy · δαx                       (4.22)

i.e.,
                                      δNf lux = −δβx2 − δα2x .                            (4.23)

For time like δβx , δαx this is positive. So by altering the flux in this manner the number
of D3 branes that need to be added can be reduced, (2.3). In particular one can easily find
choices of δαx , δβx which give rise to a vacuum where Nf lux = 24 and no D3-branes need
be added.
        Second, the above examples with dimVf lux > 2, which are generated from the old
solutions by altering the flux vectors, correspond to orbifold singularities. This follows
from the discussions on orbifold singularities in §3.3 and because of the fact that the
lattice vectors δαx , δαy ∈ Vf lux are orthogonal to Ω.

4.2. A solution with common quadratic

        We now find some solutions of the quartic (3.21a) and quintic (3.21b) . For simplicity
we restrict the flux vectors to satisfy

                         (αx · αy ) = (βx · βy ) = (αx · βy + αy · βx ) = 0 .             (4.24)

We further assume
                               (βx · βx ) = 2(αx · αx ) = 2(αx · βx )
                                                                                          (4.25)
                               (βy · βy ) = 2(αy · αy ) = 2(αy · βy ) .

                                                  23
With this assumption the quartic and quintic reduces to

                 αxx αyy 4φ4 − 8φ3 + 8φ2 − 4φ + 1 = 0 ,
                                                   
                                                                                         (4.26)
                    α2xx αyy −4φ5 + 12φ4 − 16φ3 + 12φ2 − 5φ + 1 = 0 ,
                                                               


where αxx and αyy are defined in App. B. The above polynomials can be rewritten as
                                                   2
                            αxx αyy 2φ2 − 2φ + 1     =0,
                                                         2                              (4.27)
                            α2xx αyy (1 − φ) 2φ2 − 2φ + 1 = 0 .

Clearly, they share a common quadratic

                                         2φ2 − 2φ + 1                                    (4.28)

which can be set to zero to obtain solution for φ as
                                             1
                                        φ=     (1 ± i) .                                 (4.29)
                                             2
From (3.29) and on using the assumptions (4.24),(4.25) the expression for τ becomes
                                         r
                                            αyy
                                    τ =i         .                                (4.30)
                                            αxx

The conditions (4.24),(4.25) can be met by some suitable choice of the flux vectors. For
example consider
                                   αx = 2(e1 − e2 ) ,
                                   αy = 2(e1 + e2 + e4 ) ,
                                                                                         (4.31)
                                   βx = −4e2 ,
                                   βy = 2(2e1 + e4 + e5 ) .
This is a solution of (2+, 2−)-type. For these flux vectors αxx = 16 and αyy = 8. Hence,
               √
we have τ = i/ 2 . The resulting solution is non-singular. Im(φ), Im(τ ) 6= 0, and one can
show that (3.31), is also met. One can also show that orbifold singularities are avoided.
Since Im(τ ) is irrational, there is no element of Γ3,19 contained in Vf lux which is orthogonal
to Ω.
    Finally, we note that the contribution due to the flux to the D3-brane tadpole condi-
tion, (2.8), is given by
                                Nf lux = αx .βy − βx .αy = 32 .                          (4.32)

As a result 8 D3 branes need to be added for a consistent solution.

                                              24
5. The Second Branch and N = 2 Supersymmetry

    As was mentioned at the very end of §3 the general strategy discussed therein for
finding susy solutions is applicable only if the constant c , (3.9), is non-zero. In section
§5.1 we discuss how to find solutions for which this constant vanishes, by formulating both
the conditions on the flux for such solutions to exist and determining the constraints on
the moduli in the resulting vacua. We will refer to these solutions as lying in the “second
branch”. In §5.2 we show that the second branch in fact meets the necessary and sufficient
conditions for preserving N = 2 supersymmetry. In §5.3 we give an example of such a
solution.

5.1. The Second Branch

    We begin by noting that if c, the constant in (3.9), vanishes, then

                                     Gz̄ = nx τ − ny = 0 .                                (5.1)

Equating the real and imaginary parts of (5.1) separately to zero we obtain

                           αx Re(τ ) − βx Re(τ φ) = αy − βy Re(φ) ,

                             αx Im(τ ) − βx Im(τ φ) = −βy Im(φ) .

Thus only two of the flux vectors αx , αy , βx , βy , at best, are linearly independent. So the
first thing we learn is that for a solution of this kind, dim Vf lux ≤ 2. Since in a nonsingular
solution, Im(φ), does not vanish we can take these two independent flux vectors to be αx ,
and βx .
    Next let us consider the constraints coming from primitivity. For the solutions of §3
this was discussed in §3.3 and much of that analysis goes over to the present case as well.
In particular, one finds again that J˜ must be spacelike and orthogonal to Vf lux .
    The remaining constraints come from the (2, 1) condition. This takes the form of the
following equations:
                                  Gz · Ω = 0 , Gz · Ω̄ = 0 ,                             (5.2a)

                                    Ω · Ω = 0 , Ω · Ω̄ > 0 .                             (5.2b)

    From (5.2a) get

                         (nx τ̄ − ny ) · Ω = 0 , (nx τ̄ − ny ) · Ω̄ = 0 .

                                               25
Using the fact, (5.1) that ny = τ nx , and Im(τ ) 6= 0, the above conditions can be written
as
                                         nx · Ω = 0 , n̄x · Ω = 0

or equivalently
                                        αx · Ω = 0 , βx · Ω = 0 .                                          (5.3)

As a result we see that Ω must be orthogonal to Vf lux .
         In §3.3 we found it useful to classify Vf lux by the number of positive, negative, and
null norm eigenvectors of the inner product matrix. In the present case, putting the
constraints from the primitivity and the (2, 1) conditions together one can show that Vf lux
cannot contain any eigenvectors of positive, or null norm.
         The argument is as follows. We saw in §2.3 that Ω, J˜ together define a space-like three-
plane, Σ, in H 2 (K3, R). Now let v1 ∈ Vf lux be a positive norm eigenvector, then Ω and
J˜ and therefore Σ, must be orthogonal to it. But since H 2 (K3, R) has signature (3, 19),
                                                        ˜ requires that Vf lux contains no
such a three-plane cannot exist. Thus a non-singular Ω, J,
positive norm eigenvector. A similar argument shows that Vf lux cannot contain any null
norm eigenvector either 9 .
         The only possibilities we are then left with is that Vf lux is of dim. 2 and type (0+, 2−),
or of dim 1 and type (0+, 1−). Once the flux meets these conditions susy preserving vacua
can be found. The complex structure and Kähler two-form are somewhat constrained in
these vacua but not completely fixed. Ω is orthogonal to Vf lux and is defined by an oriented
spacelike two plane in the subspace V⊥ orthogonal to Vf lux , while Ω, J˜ together define a
space-like three plane in V⊥ . E.g., in the case where dim. Vf lux = 2, the space of complex
structures of K3 is given (upto discrete identifications) by the Grassmanian


                                  G = O + (3, 17)/(O(2) × O(1, 17))+,                                      (5.4)

     9
         If vN ∈ Vf lux is a null eigenvector, we can write vN = v1 + v4 , where v1 · v1 > 0, v4 ·
v4 < 0, v1 · v4 = 0. A basis of orthogonal vectors in H (K3,R) can be now constructed, B =
{v1 , v4 , v2 , v3 , v5 · · · v22 }, where v1 , v2 , v3 are spacelike and the rest are timelike. Define V̂ as the
subspace spanned by the basis elements {v2 , v3 , v5 , · · · v22 }. One can show that the existence of
                ˜ requires the existence of a spacelike three-plane in V̂ . This is impossible since
non-singular Ω, J,
V̂ has signature (2, 18).

                                                       26
which is 36 dimensional, while the moduli space of Einstein metrics has the form (again
upto discrete identifications),


                           ME = O + (3, 17)/(SO(3) × O(17)) × R+ ,                          (5.5)


which is 52 dimensional.
       Also, while the Kähler modulus of the T 2 is not constrained. the dilaton φ and the
complex structure of the T 2 , τ , can be determined from (5.1). For example, by taking the
projections of (5.1), along αx , we find τ is given by

                                                (αx · ny )
                                          τ=               .                                (5.6)
                                                (αx · nx )

Taking a projection of (5.1) along βx and using (5.6), we then get,


                           (βx · nx )(αx · ny ) − (βx · ny )(αx · nx ) = 0,                 (5.7)


which is a quadratic equation in φ that can be solved.
       To summarise, for a solution along this second branch to exist, the following conditions
must be met by the flux: dim. Vf lux ≤ 2, and Vf lux must be spanned by time like vectors
10
     . The dilaton and τ are then determined by (5.7), (5.6). The complex structure and
Kähler moduli of K3 are somewhat constrained but not determined completely, and the
Kähler modulus of the T 2 is not constrained at all.
       Before proceeding further, we would like to mention that all the solutions in the second
branch correspond to orbifold singularities. From §2.3 we learn that there exists an orbifold
singularity when ever the space like three plane Σ is orthogonal to a lattice vector of Γ3,19 .
                                                                           ˜ From (5.3) we
Primitivity requires the flux vectors to be orthogonal to the Kähler form J.
find that they are also orthogonal to Ω. Hence the three plane Σ is orthogonal to Vf lux ,
resulting in orbifold singularities.

 10
       There are some additional constraints on the flux which come from requiring that Im(φ) and
Im(τ ) are non zero, these can be deduced in a straightforward manner and we will not determine
them explicitly here.

                                                 27
5.2. N = 2 Supersymmetry

       We will now show that solutions in the second branch discussed above meet the nec-
essary and sufficient conditions for N = 2 supersymmetry.
       These conditions were discussed for the T 6 /Z2 case in [9]. A similar analysis can be
carried out for K3 × T 2 /Z2 as well. Here we will skip some of the details and state the
main results. The necessary and sufficient conditions for N = 2 susy are the following: An
SO(4)×U (1) group of rotations acts on the tangent space of K3×T 2 . For preserving N = 2
susy G3 must transform as a (3, 0)+2 representation under SU (2)L × SU (2)R × U (1) ≃
SO(4) × U (1). This means in the notation of this paper that Gz̄ must vanish and Gz must
transform as the anti self-dual representation of SO(4) 11 .
       Since Gz̄ must vanish we see that all N = 2 preserving solutions must lie in the second
branch. We now show that all solutions in the second branch also meet the requirement
of Gz being anti-self dual. To see this, we have to simply note that any vector belonging
to H 2 (K3, R) which is orthogonal to both Ω and J˜ must be an anti-self dual two-form
12
     . We saw above that Gz meets this condition in the second branch. This proves that
all solutions in the second branch meet the necessary and sufficient conditions for N = 2
supersymmetry.
       A final comment. One should be able to associate more than one complex structure,
which still keeps G3 of type (2, 1), with a solution of N = 2 susy. For solutions in the
second branch such an additional complex structure is given by taking Ω ↔ Ω̄. This clearly
changes the complex structure. And from the discussion of the second branch above it is
easy to see that G3 still continues to meet the (2, 1) condition 13 (primitivity is of course
still true, since J˜ is unchanged).

 11
        In [9] this representation was referred to as the self-dual representation. The discrepancy is
due to an opposite choice of orientation, or equivalently opposite choice of sign for ǫabcd (notation
of [9]), in the two papers. The choice in this paper agrees with the conventional one, [32] for K3.
 12
     H 2 (K3, R) can be decomposed into, H + + H − , the self-dual and anti self-dual subspace. Σ,
                             ˜ is identical to H + . Thus any vector orthogonal to Ω, J,
the three plane formed by Ω, J,                                                         ˜ must be
anti self-dual.
 13
       Gz is orthogonal to Ω̄ and Gz̄ vanishes.

                                                  28
5.3. An Example

     For an example we consider the case where

                                      1
                                            F3 =2e4 ∧ dy ,
                                   (2π)2 α′
                                                                                        (5.8)
                                     1
                                           H3 =2e4 ∧ dx .
                                  (2π)2 α′

where e4 ∈ Γ3,3 ⊂ Γ3,19 (see App. A). And e4 · e4 = −2, so that e4 is a time-like vector.
     From, (2.6), (2.7), we see that αx = 0, βx = 2e4 , αy = 2e4 , βy = 0. So Vf lux is one
dimensional and is of type (0, 1−), i.e., it is spanned by a time like vector. Thus the
required conditions for a solution in the second branch are met. It is easy to see that in
this simple case, φ, τ are not completely fixed. Rather, (5.1) imposes one condition on
them
                                         φτ = −1.                                       (5.9)

     The moduli space of complex structure of K3, is now the Grassmanian O(3, 18)/(O(2)×
O(1, 18)) (upto discrete identifications), which is 38 dimensional and the moduli space of
Einstein metrics on K3 has the form O(3, 18)/(O(3) × O(18)) × R+ , ( again upto discrete
identifications), which is 55 dimensional.
     The flux contribution to three brane charge is Nf lux /2 = 4, (2.8), (2.3), so that 20
D3-branes need to be added in this case. It follows from the discussion in the previous
subsection that this model has N = 2 supersymmetry.



6.   “Large” Flux

     In the study of flux vacua it is important to find out how many distinct fluxes there
are (not related by duality) which give rise to allowed vacua. In particular one would like
to know if this number is finite or infinite. A related question is to ask if the flux can be
made “large” subject to the restriction that the total D3-brane charge is fixed. In this
section we examine this question for the K3 × T 2 /Z2 case. We construct a one parameter
family of fluxes which are inequivalent, all of which have the same contribution to the D3
brane charge, (2.4). However only one of these sets of fluxes gives rise to a vacuum, for all
the other values of the parameter one can show that there is no susy preserving or susy
breaking vacuum.

                                             29
    The idea behind the construction is as follows. Consider starting with a case where
the flux vectors αx , αy , βx , βy , yield a consistent susy solution. Suppose a null vector,
v ∈ H 2 (K3, Z), v · v = 0, exists which is orthogonal to all four of these flux vectors. Then
one can consider modifying the flux vectors by adding arbitrary (even integer) multiples
of the null vector v. E.g αx → αx + nx v etc. As a concrete example consider starting with
the flux, (4.8), with dimVf lux = 2, discussed in §4.1. A null vector v can always be found
in this case orthogonal to Vf lux . We can now modify the flux vectors as follows, αy , βx , βy
are unchanged, while,
                                       αx → αx + 2nv.                                     (6.1)

It is quite straightforward to show that the resulting family consists of distinct fluxes not
related by U duality transformations. E.g. large coordinate transformations on K3 cannot
turn the starting flux, to (6.1). This is because to begin, αx = βy , but only αx varies as
n is changed. Similarly S duality which exchanges H3 and F3 and T-duality on the T 2
also do not relate these different choices. Thus we see that as n is varied we have a one
parameter family of different fluxes with the same value of Nf lux .
    Let us now examine if the modified fluxes lead to allowed vacua. For a susy pre-
serving vacuum the flux must be of type (2, 1) and primitive. Clearly the equations
(3.13),(3.14),(3.10), still continue to hold for the same values of φ, τ as before and the
inequality (3.15) is still met. So with τ and φ fixed at the same value as before the (2, 1)
condition is met for the new fluxes as well. Note that the new complex structure of K3
will change on modifying the flux vectors. From (3.9) we see that Gz̄ and therefore Ω will
be different.
    Next let us consider the primitivity condition. It is easy to see that this cannot be met
for the modified flux vectors. This follows from the discussion in §3.3. The inner product
matrix in Vf lux , after the modification, will have one null eigenvector. As a result, one
cannot find a spacelike Kähler two-form in K3 orthogonal to Vf lux .
    So we see that for n 6= 0 there is no susy preserving solution.
    Next let us ask about susy breaking vacua. In this case the flux can be a sum of type
(2, 1) and primitive, (0, 3) and (1, 2). The (1, 2) term must be of the type, J ∧ α, where
J is the Kähler two form and α is a non-trivial one form of type (0, 1). It is easy to see
that this implies that, Gz , is of type, (1, 1), and satisfies the condition, Gz · J = 0, while,
Gz̄ can be expressed as, Gz̄ = c1 Ω + c2 Ω̄ + c3 J. Note that, Ω · J = Ω̄ · J = 0, so that Ω, J
together define a spacelike three plane. As a result, the conditions, (3.13), (3.14), must

                                              30
still hold. Together with the condition, J · Gz , these imply that the real and imaginary
parts of Gz must be time like vectors. But this condition cannot be met for a non-zero
Gz since Vf lux is spanned by two spacelike vectors, (4.8), and one null vector, v. Finally,
it is also easy to show that for the modified flux, (6.1), and nonsingular values of φ, τ , Gz
cannot vanish. Thus we conclude that for n 6= 0 there are no susy breaking solution.
    In summary we have constructed a one parameter family of fluxes in this section, all
of which correspond to the same value of Nf lux , (2.4). However, only one of them leads to
an allowed vacuum.



7. Duality

    In this section we will study various dual descriptions of the IIB theory on K3×T 2 /Z2
in the presence of flux.
                                                          ′
    One T-duality will take us to Type IIA (or Type I ) with O8 planes. Two T-dualities
will lead to a Type I description. Finally a further S-duality will give rise to a Heterotic
description. The dual descriptions are not (conformally) Calabi-Yau spaces, in fact they
are not even Kähler manifolds. They are related to compactifications of the Heterotic string
with Torsion, [36,22] and the more recent constructions in [23–25]. A general understanding
of such compactifications is still not available in the literature. Our discussion will parallel
that of [25], and we will use similar notation below.
    The supergravity backgrounds for the three duals mentioned above can be explicitly
constructed for all IIB flux compactifications on K3 × T 2 /Z2 . The H3 flux in the starting
theory must have two legs along the K3 and one along the T 2 , see (2.7). The isometries
along both the directions of the T 2 can be then made manifest by choosing a gauge where
the two-form NS gauge potential, B, has no dependence on the two T 2 directions. One
and two T-dualities along these directions can then be explicitly carried out and the su-
pergravity backgrounds can be obtained using [37–39]. Following this it is straightforward
to carry out the S-duality as well.
    However, since several moduli are fixed in the starting description, it is not always
possible to go to a region of moduli space where the sugra description is valid in the dual
theory. This problem can be avoided in cases where the moduli are only partially lifted, in
such situations the dual sugra description can sometimes be reliable. An example of such
a compactification for the T 6 /Z2 case was explored in [25], similar examples for K3 × T 2
can also be constructed, but we will not elaborate on them here.

                                              31
      We will also construct a superpotential in the dual theories below. It will involve the
appropriate RR and NS fluxes as well as certain “twists” in the geometry.
      One comment about notation. In this section µ, ν, ... denotes all the compact direc-
tions. The two directions of the T 2 are denoted by x, y. We will carry out T-duality along
the x direction first and then along the y direction. α, β, ... will denote compact directions
other than x and α̂, β̂, ... compact directions other than x and y.

7.1. One T-duality

      We carry out the T-duality along the x direction of the T 2 . As was mentioned above
one can always choose a gauge in which Bxα̂ is independent of the T 2 directions.
      We denote the metric of IIB theory before duality by jµν , and the metric in the IIA
theory after T-duality by gµν . The metric of the resulting manifold M′ is given by

                                 1                1
                       ds2M′ =         ηx ηx +         (detxy j) dy 2 + jα̂β̂ dxα̂ dxβ̂      (7.1)
                                 jxx             jxx

where the one form η x = dx − Bxα̂ dxα̂ , which can also be written as η x = gxµ dxµ /gxx and
                     2
detxy j = jxx jyy − jxy . Note that Bxα̂ dxα̂ varies non-trivially along the K3. As a result
the resulting compactification is a sort of “twisted” analogue of the K3 × T 2 space 14 . It
would be quite useful to have a more complete understanding of such compactifications.
In [25], it was shown that the dual compactifications could be thought of as cosets which
are generalisations of the nilmanifold. It would be interesting to ask if there is a similar
description in the present case.
      Two more comments are in order at this stage. First, besides the metric, the RR
forms F4 , F2 , and the NS form H3 , are also excited in this background. Their values can
be determined using the formulae in App.C, [38], [39], but we will not do so here. Second,
one can define a two form
                                       ω(x) = −d(gxα dxα /gxx ) .                            (7.2)

This is the x component of the antisymmetrised spin connection. The x direction is an
isometry of the IIA metric and ω(x) is the field strength of the Kaluza Klein gauge symmetry
associated with this isometry. It will enter our discussion of the superpotential below.
      Superpotential
 14
      It can be shown by an explicit calculation that due to the non-trivial twist, M′ is not Ricci
flat. It follows then that it cannot be a Calabi Yau manifold.

                                                       32
    In writing down a superpotential in the dual theory which is the analogue of (3.1), it
is first convenient to define an almost complex structure (ACS) as follows.
    Define the one-form
                                  η z = η x + i detxy jdy .
                                               p
                                                                                          (7.3)
The metric (7.1) can then be written as
                                            1
                                 ds2M′ =         η z η̄ z̄ + ds2K3 ,                      (7.4)
                                           jxx
with ds2K3 denoting the metric over K3,

                                    ds2K3 = jα̂β̂ dxα̂ dxβ̂ .                             (7.5)
    Consider a complex structure on K3 compatible with the metric, (7.5). Let dz 1 , dz 2
be holomorphic one forms (in the space spanned by dxα̂ , α̂, 1, · · · 4) with respect to this
complex structure. Then the required almost complex structure we use below is defined by
specifying a basis of holomorphic one forms to be η z , dz 1 , dz 2 . A holomorphic (3, 0) form
ΩIIA can be constructed, it is
                                       ΩIIA = Ω ∧ η z ,                                   (7.6)
where Ω ∼ dz 1 ∧ dz 2 is the holomorphic (2, 0) form on K3. This ACS is analogous to that
used in [25]. While we omit the details here, the spinor conditions take a convenient form
with this choice of ACS and as a result a superpotential can also be easily constructed.
    The superpotential is given by
                                           Z
                                 WIIA =           GIIA ∧ ΩIIA                             (7.7)
                                            M′
where                                  √
                                x
           GIIA = F̃4(x) + gxx η ∧ F2 − i gxx /gsIIA H3 − gxx η x ∧ ω(x) .
                                                                       
                                                                                          (7.8)
    Here we have used the definitions
                                              h      i
                        F̃4 = dC3 + A1 ∧ H3 , F̃4(x)               = F̃xαβγ .             (7.9)
                                                             αβγ
The last term of the superpotential contains a component of the spin connection which
was discussed above in (7.2). It arises from the term in the starting IIB superpotential
(3.1), proportional to H3 with one leg along the x direction.
    Evidence in support for this superpotential includes the following. First, susy requires
that GIIA is of type (2, 1) with respect to the ACS defined above. This condition is obtained
by varying the superpotential (7.7). Second, the various terms in the superpotential (7.7),
correctly account for the tension of various BPS domain walls in the theory. In particular
the last term, involving the spin connection, gives the tension of a KK monopole related
to the x isometry direction.

                                                 33
7.2. Two T-dualities

       We can now further T-dualise along the y direction to obtain a type I compactification
with F3 flux and twists in the geometry. We denote the dual manifold as M. The metric
on M is                                                                        
                        ds2M = ĵxx η̂ x η̂ x + ĵyy η̂ y η̂ y + 2ĵxy η̂ x η̂ y + ds2K3           (7.10)

with
                                   jyy              jxx                jxy
                         ĵxx =           , ĵyy =         , ĵxy = −         ,                    (7.11)
                                  detxy j          detxy j            detxy j
and
                                                  ĵyy                          
                               η̂ x = dx +                ĵxx ĵ(x) − ĵxy ĵ(y) ,                (7.12)
                                                 detxy ĵ

                                                  ĵxx                           
                                η̂ y = dy +               ĵyy ĵ(y) − ĵxy ĵ(x)                  (7.13)
                                                 detxy ĵ
Note, we use ‘ˆ’ to denote quantities in the type I theory.
       A superpotential can be defined in this case as well. The metric (7.10) can be rewritten
as
                                                                 z̄
                                          ds2M = ĵxx η̂ z η̄ˆ + ds2K3                             (7.14)

An almost complex structure can be now be specified by defining one holomorphic one-form
to be
                                                 η̂ z = η̂ x + τ̂ η̂ y ,

and two additional holomorphic one-forms to be compatible with the complex structure of
K3.
       A (3, 0) form Ω̂ is then defined by

                                                     Ω̂ = Ω ∧ η̂ z .                               (7.15)

where Ω is the holomorphic two-form of K3.
       The resulting superpotential is
                                                         Z
                                                 Ŵ =           Ĝ ∧ Ω̂                            (7.16)
                                                           M

where                                                                              
                                  x          y                             x      y
                    Ĝ = ĵxx η̂ + ĵxy η̂ ∧ F̂3(y) − ĵxy η̂ + ĵyy η̂ ∧ F̂3(x)
                            q
                               i                                                                 (7.17)
                                                          x                       y
                        −             det xy ĵ  ĵ xx η̂   ∧ d ĵ (x) + ĵ yy η̂   ∧ d ĵ (y)
                             gsI

                                                           34
Some additional notation used in the above formula is as follows. The one and two forms
ĵ(x) , Ĥ3(x) , F̂3(x) are given as

                                        1                  h      i              h i
                            ĵ(x) =           ĵxα̂ dxα̂ , F̂3(x)               = F̂3       ,         (7.18)
                                       ĵxx                              α̂β̂       xα̂β̂


and similar expressions for the quantities carrying the index ‘y’. Also we have used the
definition                                                          
                                                                  2
                                         detxy ĵ = ĵxx ĵyy − ĵxy   ,                              (7.19)
                                                   I
and the type I string coupling gsI = eφ                15
                                                            .

7.3. Heterotic Dual

       Making a further S-duality we obtain heterotic theory on a manifold Mhet whose
metric (in string frame) is given by

                                       ds2het = jxx
                                                 h z z̄
                                                    ηh η̄h + gshet ds2K3 .                            (7.20)

We denote the metric components in the heterotic theory with a superscript ‘ h ’ , which
are related to the type I metric by a factor of the string coupling gshet :

                                                                 1 h
                                                  ĵµν =             j .
                                                                gs µν
                                                                 het


       We choose an almost complex structure in the heterotic theory, which agrees with the
one described above for the Type I case. The corresponding (3, 0) form is then given by
Ω̂, (7.15), and the superpotential is the same as (7.16). Expressed in heterotic language
this takes the form,                                    Z
                                              Whet =                 Ghet ∧ Ω̂                        (7.21)
                                                            Mhet

with
                           h x      h y              h x      h y
                                                                    
                   Ghet = jxx η̂ + jxy η̂ ∧ H3(y) − jxy η̂ + jyy η̂ ∧ H3(x)
                            q                                                                       (7.22)
                                      h     h x   h      h y       h
                         − i detxy j jxx η̂ ∧ dj(x) + jyy η̂ ∧ dj(y) .

 15
     Note that The general expression for the superpotential in [25] after T-dualizing along
                                            ˆ
both x and y appears with terms containing F̃     , F̂ and Ĥ but are absent here in the
                                                                 5(xy)          1       3

superpotential (7.16) . This is due to the fact that terms containing the above quantities arise
from [F3 ]α̂β̂ γ̂ , [F3 ]xyα̂ , [H3 ]α̂β̂γ̂ of the original type IIB theory. However they are projected out in
K3 × T 2 /Z2 compactification of IIB.

                                                                35
    The two forms H3(x) , H3(y) , above are given by

                                                   
                       H3(x) α̂β̂ = [H3 ]xα̂β̂ , H3(y) α̂β̂ = [H3 ]yα̂β̂ .           (7.23)


    Before closing let us note that heterotic compactifications with H3 flux have been
considered in [40,36,22,33,24]. The ACS we have defined above is not integrable in general.
However, the heterotic compactifications, and also the Type I models of the preceding
section, are in fact complex manifolds, as can be shown from the analysis in [36], and
admit an integrable ACS. It would be interesting to ask what form the superpotential
takes in terms of this complex structure.



8. The T 6 /Z2 orientifold

    In this section we will discuss two aspects of flux compactifications on T 6 /Z2 . §8.1
presents general susy preserving solutions for the T 6 /Z2 compactification, in analogy with
the discussion in §3 for K3 × T 2 /Z2 . §8.2 deals with a family of susy breaking solutions,
similar to the one in §6 with complex structure stabilised at extreme values for large flux.


8.1. General Susy Solutions

    Here we discuss general susy preserving solutions in the T 6 /Z2 model. We will build
on the discussion in [9]. The essential idea is similar to §3 above. The requirements on the
flux for the existence of susy solutions can be stated in terms of simultaneous solutions to
two polynomial equations. Once these requirements are met the complex structure moduli
can be determined in terms of the flux.
    We start with the superpotential,
                                            Z
                                      W =       G3 ∧ Ω3 .                              (8.1)


We will use the notation of [9], below. In particular,

                          1
                                F3 = a0 α0 + aij αij + bij β ij + b0 β 0
                       (2π)2 α′
                                                                                       (8.2)
                          1
                                H3 = c0 α0 + cij αij + dij β ij + d0 β 0 ,
                       (2π)2 α′

                                                36
where the three forms αij and β ij are defined in [9]. Susy solutions satisfy the conditions
W = ∂i W = 0, where i denotes all complex structure moduli. It was shown in Sec. §4.4
of [9], that the equation ∂τ ij W = 0 can be used to solve for τ ij in terms of φ as
                                                   
                               cof(τ − Ã)   = cof Ã   + B̃ij                          (8.3)
                                                ij             ij


where we define A0 = a0 − φc0 , Aij = aij − φcij and Ãij = Aij /A0 and similar definitions
for B0 , Bij and B̃ij . Solving (8.3) for τ ij we get
                                                               ij
                                                   (cofµ)
                                     τ ij = Ãij + p                                    (8.4)
                                                     det(µ)

where we define µij as                           
                                     µij = cof Ã   + B̃ij                              (8.5)
                                                          ij

Thus once we know φ for a given flux we can determine τ ij . The conditions for φ are
obtained from the remaining two equations W = 0 and ∂φ W = 0. Combining W = 0 and
∂τ ij W = 0 gives a quartic for φ
                                                    1
             B0 detA − A0 detB + (cofA)ij (cofB)ij + (A0 B0 + Aij Bij )2 = 0            (8.6)
                                                    4
The derivation of this equation is given in App. B of [9]. In addition we need ∂φ W to be
zero, which combined with W = 0 gives

                           a0 det(τ ) − aij (cofτ )ij − bij τ ij − b0 = 0

Eliminating τ ij from above we get
                                           1
                                  ∆+ √          (cofµ)ij Σij = 0                        (8.7)
                                          det µ

where Σij and ∆ are defined as

                        1 0          1
                   Σij ≡ a cof Ã     + a0 B̃ij − ǫikm ǫjln akl Ãmn − bij              (8.8)
                        3          ij  3
and
                                          2
                            ∆ ≡ Ãij Σij + Ãij B̃ij − aij B̃ij − b0                    (8.9)
                                          3
We take the square of (8.7) to obtain a polynomial in φ :
                                                2
                                 Σij (cofµ)ij        − det(µ)∆2 = 0                    (8.10)

                                                     37
The equations (8.6) and (8.10) can be rewritten as

                          F4 (φ) ≡ fˆ0 + fˆ1 φ + fˆ2 φ2 + fˆ3 φ3 + fˆ4 φ4 = 0               (8.11)

and
                         G12 (φ) ≡ ĝ0 + ĝ1 φ + ĝ2 φ2 + ... + ĝ12 φ12 = 0 .              (8.12)

It is straightforward to obtain the coefficients fˆi and ĝi . They are determined in terms of
the integers a0 , aij , b0 , bij · · · appearing in the expressions of F3 and H3 as given in (8.2).
However, the expressions are quite lengthy and hence and we will not write the precise
formulae for them here.
      As before, in order to have a nonsingular solution, the polynomials F4 (φ) and G12 (φ)
must admit a common quadratic (say W2 (φ)) . Thus,

                         F4 (φ) = F2 (φ)W2 (φ) , G12 (φ) = G10 (φ)W2 (φ)                    (8.13)

where F2 (φ) and G10 (φ) are polynomials in φ with coefficients ui and vi respectively. Note
that here the subscripts in F , G and W denotes the degree of the polynomial.
     The general solution can be stated in terms of a 15 × 14 matrix M̂ defined interms of
the quantities fˆi and ĝi as

                           fˆ0
                                                                                      
                                  0     0    . .   .  0     0    −ĝ0     0       0
                          fˆ1   fˆ0    0    . .   .  0     0    −ĝ1    −ĝ0     0 
                           fˆ2   fˆ1   fˆ0
                                                                                      
                   
                                            . .   .  0     0    −ĝ2    −ĝ1    −ĝ0 
                   
                           .     .     .             .     .      .       .       .  
              M̂ = 
                           .     .     .             .     .      .       .       .      (8.14)
                           .     .     .             .     .      .       .       . 
                                                      ˆ     ˆ
                                                                                      
                           0     0     0    . .   . f3    f2    −ĝ12   −ĝ11   −ĝ10 
                                                   . fˆ4   fˆ3
                                                                                      
                           0     0     0    . .                  0      −ĝ12   −ĝ11 
                            0     0     0    . .   . 0     fˆ4    0       0      −ĝ12

and a column vector X defined as
                                                        u0
                                                           
                                                       u1 
                                                        u2 
                                                           
                                                
                                                        v0 
                                                           
                                                
                                             X =       v1                                 (8.15)
                                                           
                                                         . 
                                                           
                                                
                                                         . 
                                                           
                                                
                                                         .
                                                           
                                                        v12

                                                   38
The column vector must satisfy
                                            M̂X = 0                                    (8.16)

In addition the solution obtained for φ must be complex. The coefficients ŵi in the poly-
nomial W2 (φ) can be obtained from (8.13) in terms of ui and vi , which themselves are
solved in terms of fˆi , ĝi from (8.15) . They must obey

                                          ŵ12 < 4ŵ0 ŵ2

In addition the imaginary part of τij as given in (8.4) also must be non zero.

8.2. Large Flux on Tori

     Here we construct a one parameter family of flux for the T 6 /Z2 case analogous to the
one discussed in the §6 for K3 × T 2 /Z2 . The family consists of fluxes unrelated by duality,
but with a fixed, Nf lux , (2.4). As in §6, we find there is an allowed vacuum for only one
value of the parameter.
     We will consider tori of the form T 4 × T 2 and turn on three-form flux with two legs
along the T 4 and one leg along the T 2 (this is consistent with the Z2 orientifolding). The
discussion of §6 can now be largely carried over to this case with the T 4 replacing K3.
     As a concrete example, we consider the case where the three-flux takes the form

                                  1
                                        F3 = 2e1 ∧ dx + 2e2 ∧ dy
                               (2π)2 α′
                                                                                       (8.17)
                                 1
                                       H3 = −2e2 ∧ dx + 2e1 ∧ dy,
                              (2π)2 α′

where in our notation 0 ≤ x, y ≤ 1 are coordinate on the T 2 and e1 , e2 , · · · are two -
forms on T 4 as discussed in App.A. In the notation of §3, §6, this corresponds to taking,
αx = βy = 2e1 , and, αy = −βx = 2e2 .
     It is straightforward to show that in this case a susy preserving solution exists where
φ = τ = i, with τ being the complex structure of the T 2 , and, where the T 4 = T 2 × T 2
with the complex structure of both T 2 ’s being stabilised at the same point in moduli space,
τ 1 = τ 2 = i. The Primitivity condition can also then be easily met by a Kähler two-form,
                                            X
                                       J=         giī dz i dz ī ,                    (8.18)
                                              i

where i = 1, · · · 3, refers to the three two-tori respectively .

                                                  39
     Now consider the vector
                                          v = e3 + e4 ,                                 (8.19)

valued in H 2 (T 4 , Z) (again we refer the Reader to App.A for definitions). It is null, i.e.,
v · v = 0, and orthogonal to e1 , e2 .
     We can now modify the flux vectors as follows. Keep, αy , βx , βy , the same and take

                                         αx → αx + 2nv.                                 (8.20)

The (2, 1) condition can then be met if φ = τ = i and Ω (the holomorphic two-form of T 4
) meets the condition
                                Ω = (αx − φβx )τ − (αy − φβy ).                         (8.21)

The primitivity condition however cannot be satisfied. As a result no susy preserving
solution exists for the modified flux, (8.20). An argument quite similar to the one in §6
also shows that no supersymmetry breaking solution exists. Hence we conclude that for
the modified flux, (8.20), there are are no allowed vacua.


9. Discussion

     In this paper we have discussed flux compactifications of IIB string theory. Our
emphasis was on the K3 × T 2 /Z2 compactification, we also discussed some aspects of the
T 6 /Z2 case.
     There are several open questions which remain.
     The K3 × T 2 /Z2 compactification has D7-branes present in it. Our analysis did
not consider the effects of exciting the gauge fields on these seven branes. It would be
interesting to do so, both in the supersymmetry conditions and the resulting superpotential.
We mentioned in §2.4, that generically one expects the moduli associated with the locations
of the D7-branes on the T 2 to be lifted, once flux is turned on. With gauge fields excited
one expects this to continue to be true. For example, the D7-branes can acquire D5-brane
charge, if the gauge field which is excited has non-trivial first Chern class. In the presence
of a magnetic F3 flux the seven branes will then experience a force along the T 2 directions.
     We formulated in our discussion above the conditions which must be satisfied by the
flux for susy preserving solutions to exist. It would be interesting to determine how many
distinct fluxes (unrelated by duality) there are which meet these conditions. In particular,
one would like to know if this number is finite or infinite and if the fluxes can be made

                                               40
large subject to the restriction of total D3-brane charge being held fixed. We saw above
by constructing explicit examples that this restriction does allow for an infinite number of
distinct fluxes, and therefore to large flux. However, even allowing for susy breaking we
found that only one set of fluxes, in the one parameter family we constructed, gave rise
to a stable vacuum. In fact, so far, by varying the flux, we have been unable to construct
am infinite family of vacua with broken or unbroken susy. It will be useful to settle this
issue conclusively in the future. This will be a useful step in addressing the question of
how may N = 1 vacua there are in string theory.
      The next logical step in the study of flux vacua, in continuation of [9] and this paper,
would be to consider (orientifolds of) Calabi-Yau threefolds with flux. At the moment, we
do not see how to directly generalise the techniques devised for K3 to Calabi Yau threefolds.
Perhaps, the best approach might be to consider a simple case with few complex structure
moduli and explicitly evaluate the superpotential 16 .
      We examined some dual theories related to the flux compactifications of IIB string
theory above, and saw that they are not Calabi-Yau spaces. We also obtained a super-
potential in these dual descriptions. Much more can be done along this direction. For
example, one would like to construct examples which cannot be related to Calabi-Yau
compactifications via duality.
      Finally, from the viewpoint of moduli stabilisation, the most serious limitation of these
models is that the volume modulus (in the IIB description) is not stabilised. It would
be illuminating to consider various additional effects which could lift this direction. Non-
perturbative gauge dynamics on the world volume of D7-branes, present in the K3×T 2 /Z2
example considered above, might provide a tractable example.

                                     Acknowledgements

      It is a great pleasure to thank S. Kachru for extensive discussions. We are also
grateful to K. Dasgupta for discussion and for sharing results prior to publication. We
also thank A. Dabholkar, M. Douglas, and N. Fakhruddin, J. Maldacena, S. Mukhi, G. V.
Ravindra, M. Schulz and A. Sen for their comments. S.P.T. acknowledges support from the
Swarnajayanti Fellowship, Department of Science and Technology, Government of India.
The work of P.K.T. and S.P.T. was supported by the DAE, Government of India. Most of
all, we thank the people of India for enthusiastically supporting research in string theory.

 16
      We thank S. Kachru for preliminary discussions on this.

                                               41
Appendix A. Γ3,19 Lattice

      In this appendix we give some details about the integral cohomology of K3. Our
conventions for orientation etc on K3 × T 2 /Z2 are also explained. Towards the end we
discuss the four-torus, T 4 , this is relevant to the discussion in §8.2.
      The integral cohomology H 2 (K3, Z) has the structure of an even self-dual lattice of
Γ3,19 of signature (3, 19). We can choose a basis {ei } for Γ3,19 such that the inner products
of the basis vectors 17                                   Z
                                     gij = (ei , ej ) =         ei ∧ ej                 (A.1)
                                                           K3

is given by the following matrix
                                                                     
                                               H3,3        0       0
                                  gij =        0         −E8      0                   (A.2)
                                                0          0      −E8

where the matrix H3,3 is defined as

                                               0   1      0   0    0   0
                                                                        
                                              1   0      0   0    0   0
                                               0   0      0   1    0   0
                                                                        
                                H3,3 =                                                 (A.3)
                                       
                                               0   0      1   0    0   0
                                                                         
                                       
                                               0   0      0   0    0   1
                                                                        
                                               0   0      0   0    1   0

and E8 is the Catran matrix of E8 algebra :

                                   2 −1 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                                    
                                 −1 2 −1 0 0 0 0 0 
                                 0 −1 2 −1 0 0 0 −1 
                                                    
                                 0 0 −1 2 −1 0 0 0 
                                                    
                           E8 =                      .                                (A.4)
                                 0 0 0 −1 2 −1 0 0 
                                 0 0 0 0 −1 2 −1 0 
                                                    
                                   0 0 0 0 0 −1 2 0
                                                    
                                   0 0 −1 0 0 0 0 2

The basis vectors (e1 , e2 , · · · e6 ) span a subspace of H 2 (K3, Z) (which we denote as
Γ3,3 ) with the metric given by H3,3 . Note that we can make a change of basis such that
H3,3 = 2η3,3 with η3,3 = diag(1, 1, 1, −1, −1, −1) where as E8 remains the same.

 17
      We denote the inner product of lattice vectors by a dot i.e. (α, β) = α · β.

                                                   42
     Let γ2 be an element of the integral homology H2 (K3, Z). Integrating an arbitrary
two form α2 ∈ H 2 (K3, Z) over γ2 results in an integer. In particular we have
                                       Z
                                           ei ∈ Z .                                                       (A.5)
                                                      γ2

We turn on H3 and F3 fluxes over three cycles which are of the type γ2 × γ1 where γ2 is
defined earlier and γ1 ∈ H1 (T 2 /Z2 , Z). Integrating ei ∧ dx and ei ∧ dy over γ2 × γ1 results
in integers if γ1 is a ‘full cycle’ of T 2 . However if γ1 is a ‘half cycle’ of T 2 (a cycle which
is closed in T 2 /Z2 but not in T 2 ) then the result is a half integers. It was pointed out by
Frey and Polchinski [10] that in order to satisfy the Dirac quantization conditions in these
cases one needs to turn on fluxes due to exotic orientifold planes. As in [9], here we avoid
these complications by choosing the fluxes corresponding to the lattice vectors with even
coefficients in Γ3,19 .
     It is helpful to describe the cohomology basis above in detail in the T 4 /Z2 limit of K3.
The E8 × E8 lattice vectors correspond to the 16 blow up modes of the orbifold. Choosing
coordinates xi , y i , 0 ≤ xi , y i ≤ 1, i = 1, 2, for the T 4 , a basis of Z2 invariant two-forms is
given by
               √                                                  √
                   2 dx1 ∧ dx2 − dy 1 ∧ dy 2                          2 dx1 ∧ dy 2 − dx2 ∧ dy 1
                                                                                                 
        e1 =                                               e2 =
               √                                                  √
                   2 dx1 ∧ dy 1 + dx2 ∧ dy 2                          2 dx1 ∧ dx2 + dy 1 ∧ dy 2
                                                                                                 
        e3 =                                               e4 =                                           (A.6)
               √                                                  √
                   2 dx1 ∧ dy 2 + dx2 ∧ dy      1
                                                                      2 dx1 ∧ dy 1 − dx2 ∧ dy   2
                                                                                                 
        e5 =                                               e6 =                                       .

With a choice of normalization,
                                                                                1
                          Z
                                           dx1 ∧ dx2 ∧ dy 1 ∧ dy 2 = −            ,                       (A.7)
                                 T 4 /Z2                                        2

these obey the conditions,

                                  (e1 , e1 ) = (e2 , e2 ) = (e3 , e3 ) = 2

                                 (e4 , e4 ) = (e5 , e5 ) = (e6 , e6 ) = −2,

with all other inner products being zero. We see then that e1 , ..., e6 form a basis for Γ3,3 .
     For completeness let us also note that in the notation of this paper, our choice of
orientation on the T 2 is given by
                                            Z
                                                   dx ∧ dy = −1 .                                         (A.8)
                                              T2

                                                           43
   Finally we discuss the T 4 case. The six one forms e1 , · · · e6 defined above (without
   √
the 2 prefactor in normalisation), (A.6), form a basis of H 2 (T 4 , Z). We can define an
inner product in this vector space analogous to (A.1). Holomorphic coordinates on T 4 can
be defined by
                                    z i = xi + τji y j , i = 1, 2.                           (A.9)
The complex structure is completely specified by the period matrix τji . The holomorphic
two-form Ω = λ(dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ) (λ is a constant) can be expressed in terms of the basis e1 , · · · e6
as follows:
                         1                1               1
                      Ω = (1 − detτ )e1 + (τ22 + τ11 )e2 + (τ12 − τ21 )e3
                         2                2               2                                 (A.10)
                         1                1 2             1
                           (1 + detτ )e4 + (τ2 − τ11 )e5 + (τ12 + τ21 )e6 .
                         2                2               2

Appendix B. Solving the Quartic and Quintic Polynomials
      In this appendix we discuss in more detail the conditions leading to the two polyno-
mials, (3.21a) and (3.21b), having a common quadratic factor.
      The polynomials are given by

                      P (φ) ≡ p1 φ5 + p2 φ4 + p3 φ3 + p4 φ2 + p5 φ + p6 = 0                 (B.1a)

                         Q(φ) ≡ q1 φ4 + q2 φ3 + q3 φ2 + q4 φ + q5 = 0 ,                   (B.1b) .
where the coefficients pi and qi are
                    2                       2
        p1 = − γxx βxy + βxx βxy γxy − γyy βxx ,
                 2     2                                           2
        p2 =αxx βxy + βxx αyy − 2αxy βxy βxx + 4γxx γyy βxx − βxx γxy ,
                 2
        p3 = − 4γxx γyy − 2αxx βxx γyy − 4γxx βxx αyy + 2γxx αxy βxy
                     2
              + γxx γxy − αxx βxy γxy + 3αxy βxx γxy ,                                       (B.2)
        p4 = − 2α2xy βxx + 4γxx
                             2
                                αyy + 2αxx βxx αyy + 4αxx γxx γyy − 4γxx αxy γxy ,
        p5 = − α2xx γyy + 3γxx α2xy − 4αxx γxx αyy + αxx αxy γxy ,
        p6 =α2xx αyy − αxx α2xy .
and
                          2
                    q1 = βxy − βxx βyy ,
                    q2 = 2γxx βyy − 2βxy γxy + 2βxx γyy ,
                                                                     2
                    q3 = −αyy βxx + 2αxy βxy − αxx βyy − 4γxx γyy + γxy ,                    (B.3)
                    q4 = 2αyy γxx + 2αxx γyy − 2αxy γxy ,
                    q5 = α2xy − αxx αyy

                                                 44
Here we have used the notation

                                    αij ≡ αi .αj , βij ≡ βi .βj ,                      (B.4)

with i, j = {x, y}, and

                 γxx ≡ αx .βx , γyy ≡ αy .βy , and γxy ≡ αx .βy + αy .βx .             (B.5)

    Assume the quadratic factor of the form

                                    W (φ) ≡ w1 φ2 + w2 φ + w3

is the common factor of P (φ) and Q(φ) . Then

                             P (φ) = (r1 φ3 + r2 φ2 + r3 φ + r4 )W (φ)                (B.6a)

                                 Q(φ) = (s1 φ2 + s2 φ + s3 )W (φ)                     (B.6b)

for some ri and si . This gives in particular

                  (s1 φ2 + s2 φ + s3 )P (φ) = (r1 φ3 + r2 φ2 + r3 φ + r4 )Q(φ)         (B.7)

Equating the coefficients of φn from both sides we get

                    p1 s1 − q1 r1 = 0
                    (p1 s2 + p2 s1 ) − (q1 r2 + q2 r1 ) = 0
                    (p1 s3 + p2 s2 + p3 s1 ) − (q1 r3 + q2 r2 + q3 r1 ) = 0
                    (p2 s3 + p3 s2 + p4 s1 ) − (q1 r4 + q2 r3 + q3 r2 + q4 r1 ) = 0
                                                                                       (B.8)
                    (p3 s3 + p4 s2 + p5 s1 ) − (q2 r4 + q3 r3 + q4 r2 + q5 r1 ) = 0
                    (p4 s3 + p5 s2 + p6 s1 ) − (q3 r4 + q4 r3 + q5 r2 ) = 0
                    (p5 s3 + p6 s2 ) − (q4 r4 + q5 r3 ) = 0
                    p6 s3 − q5 r4 = 0

Define the matrix
                                   p1   0    0     −q1     0      0      0
                                                                           
                                  p2   p1   0     −q2    −q1     0      0 
                                   p3   p2   p1    −q3    −q2    −q1     0 
                                                                           
                          
                                   p4   p3   p2    −q4    −q3    −q2    −q1 
                                                                           
                       M ≡                                                            (B.9)
                          
                                   p5   p4   p3    −q5    −q4    −q3    −q2 
                                                                            
                          
                                   p6   p5   p4     0     −q5    −q4    −q3 
                                                                           
                          
                                   0    p6   p5     0      0     −q5    −q4
                                                                           
                                   0    0    p6     0      0      0     −q5

                                                  45
And the column vector
                                                        s1
                                                            
                                                       s2   
                                                        s3
                                                            
                                                            
                                         X=            r1                           (B.10)
                                                            
                                                             
                                                        r2
                                                            
                                                            
                                                        r3
                                                            
                                                        r4

Then (B.8), can be restated as

                                             M ·X =0                                 (B.11)

which is eq. (3.23). Thus the condition for the two polynomials sharing a common
quadratic factor is that a non-zero vector X exists satisfying (B.10).
    In terms of the components of X, we find, from (B.6b), by comparing powers of φ that
W (φ) is given by (3.24),(3.25).




Appendix C. Duality Maps

    Here we use the notation of [25] . In particular, we define the four form field strength
F̃4 = dC3 + A1 ∧ F3 in IIA theory and the five form field strength

                                         1         1
                              F̃5 = dC4 − C2 ∧ H3 + B2 ∧ F3 .
                                         2         2

We denote the T dual direction as x and also we define the one forms

                                     1                         1
                          j(x) =         jxα dxα , g(x) =         gxα dxα             (C.1)
                                   jxx                        gxx

and the exterior derivative

                                          ω(x) = −dg(x) .                             (C.2)

In addition Fn(x) denotes an n − 1 form whose components are given by:


                                [Fn(x) ]i1 ,···in−1 = [Fn ]xi1 ···in−1 .              (C.3)

                                                   46
    The Neveu-Schwarz fields transform as
                                1
                        gxx =
                               jxx
                                 Bxα
                        gxα = −
                                  jxx
                                         1
                        gαβ = jαβ −          (jxα jxβ − Bxα Bxβ )
                                        jxx
                                                                                        (C.4)
                                  jxα
                        Bxα = −
                                   jxx
                                           1
                        Bαβ = Bαβ −           (jxα Bxβ − Bxα jxβ )
                                         jxx
                                 g IIB
                        gsIIA = √s
                                    jxx
Here the left hand refers to fields in the IIA theory and the right hand side to fields in the
IIB theory. For the three form field strength, H3 this takes the form,
                           H3(x) = dj(x)
                                                                                        (C.5)
                           H3 = H3 − H3(x) ∧ j(x) − B(x) ∧ dj(x)
The Ramond fields transform as
                          F2(x) = F1
                          F2 = F̃3(x) − B(x) ∧ F1
                                                                                        (C.6)
                          F̃4(x) = F̃3 − j(x) ∧ F̃3(x)
                                                                   
                          F̃4 = F̃5(x) − B(x) ∧ F̃3 − j(x) ∧ F̃3(x)
    In the formulae above, a field strength with and without a leg along the x direction
are denoted as Fn(x) , and Fn respectively.
    The inverse of these expressions is given by
                                  1
                          jxx =
                                 gxx
                                   Bxα
                          jxα = −
                                    gxx
                                          1
                          jαβ = gαβ −         (gxα gxβ − Bxα Bxβ )
                                         gxx
                                    gxα                                                 (C.7)
                          Bxα = −
                                    gxx
                                            1
                          Bαβ = Bαβ −          (gxα Bxβ − Bxα gxβ )
                                          gxx
                                   g IIA
                          gsIIB = √s
                                     gxx

                                              47
                           H3(x) = −ω(x)
                                                                                        (C.8)
                           H3 = H3 + ω(x) ∧ B(x) − g(x) ∧ H3(x)
and
                           F1 = F2(x)
                           F̃3(x) = F2 − gx ∧ F2(x)
                                                                                       (C.9)
                           F̃3 = F̃4(x) − B(x) ∧ F2 − gx ∧ F2(x)
                           F̃5(x) = F̃4 − g(x) ∧ F̃4(x)
      The type I theory is equivalent to the heterotic theory by a S duality under which the
fields are related as
                                                1
                                         gshet =
                                               gsI
                                          h    1                                       (C.10)
                                         jµν = I ĵµν
                                              gs
                                         H3 = F̂3 .
                                                   h
Here we denoted the metric in heterotic theory as jµν and the NS field strength H3 = dB2 .
gshet heterotic string coupling. Similarly, we denoted the type I metric and RR field strength
with a ‘ˆ’ where as the string coupling is denoted by a superscript I.




                                               48
                                      References

 [1] S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten, “CFTs from Calabi-Yau Fourfolds,” Nucl. Phys.
     B584, 69 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9906070]
 [2] K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh and S. Sethi, “M-theory, Orientifolds and G-flux,” JHEP
     9908, 023 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9908088].
 [3] T. Taylor and C. Vafa, “RR flux on Calabi-Yau and Partial Supersymmetry Breading,”
     Phys. Lett. B474, 130 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9912152].
 [4] G. Curio, A. Klemm, D. Lust and S. Theisen, “On the Vacuum Structure of Type II
     String Compactifications on Calabi-Yau Spaces with H Fluxes,” Nucl. Phys. B609, 3
     (2001) [arXiv: hep-th/0012213].
 [5] M. Haack and J. Louis, “M-theory Compactified on a Calabi-Yau Fourfold with Back-
     ground Flux,” Phys. Lett. B507, 296 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0103068].
 [6] S. B. Giddings, S. Kachru and J. Polchinski, “Hierarchies from fluxes in string com-
     pactifications,” [arXiv:hep-th/0105097].
 [7] E. Silverstein, “(A)dS Backgrounds from Asymmetric Orientifolds,” [arXiv:hep-
     th/0106209].
 [8] K. Becker and M. Becker, “Supersymmetry Breaking, M-theory and Fluxes,” JHEP
     0107, 038 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0107044].
 [9] S. Kachru, M. B. Schulz and S. P. Trivedi, “Moduli Stabilization From Fluxes in a
     Simple IIB Orientifold,” [arXiv:hep-th/0201028].
[10] A. Frey and J. Polchinski, “N = 3 Warped Compactifications,” [arXiv:hep-th/0201029].
[11] R. Argurio, V. Campos, G. Ferretti and R. Heise, “Freezing of Moduli with Fluxes in
     Three-Dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B640, 351 (2002) [arXiv: hep-th/0205295].
[12] K. Becker and M. Becker, “M-theory on Eight Manifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B477, 155
     (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9605053].
[13] B. Greene, K. Schalm and G. Shiu, “Warped Compactifications in M and F-theory,”
     Nucl. Phys. B584, 480 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0004103].
[14] H. Verlinde, “Holography and Compactification,” Nucl. Phys. B580, 264 (2000)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9906182];
     C. Chan, P. Paul and H. Verlinde, “A Note on Warped String Compactification,”
     Nucl. Phys. B581, 156 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0003236].
[15] P. Mayr, “On Supersymmetry Breaking in String Theory and its Realization in Brane
     Worlds,” Nucl. Phys. B593, 99 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0003198];
     P. Mayr, “Stringy Brane Worlds and Exponential Hierarchies,” JHEP 0011, 013
     (2000), [arXiv:hep-th/0006204].
[16] J. de Boer, R. Dijkgraaf, K. Hori, A. Keurentjes, J. Morgan, D. R. Morrison and
     S. Sethi, “Triples, fluxes, and strings,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4, 995 (2002)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0103170].

                                           49
[17] S. Ferrara and M. Porrati, “N=1 No Scale Supergravity From IIB Orientifolds,” Phys.
     Lett. 545, 411 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0207135].
[18] R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and S. Vaula, “N=4 Gauged Supergravity And a IIB Orientifold
     With Fluxes,” New J. Phys. 4, 71 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0206241].
[19] L. Andrianopoli, R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and M. A. Lledo, “Gauging of Flat Groups
     in Four Dimensional Supergravity,” JHEP 0207 010 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0203206].
[20] S. Kachru, X. Liu, M. Schulz and S. P. Trivedi, “Supersymmetry Changing Bubbles
     in String Theory,” [arXiv:hep-th/0205108].
[21] A. Dabholkar and C. Hull, “Duality Twists, Orbifolds, and Fluxes,” [arXiv:hep-
     th/0210209].
[22] K. Becker and K. Dasgupta, “Heterotic Strings with Torsion,” [arXiv:hep-th/0209077]
[23] S. Gurrieri, J. Louis, A. Micu and D. Waldram, “Mirror Symmetry in Generalized
     Calabi-Yau Compactifications,” [arXiv:hep-th/0211102].
[24] G. Cardoso, G. Curio, G. Dall’Agata, D. Lüst, P. Manousselis and G. Zoupanos, “Non-
     Kähler String Backgrounds and their Five Torsion Classes,” [arXiv:hep-th/0211118].
[25] S. Kachru, M. B. Schulz, P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, “New Supersymmetric
     String Compactifications,” [arXiv:hep-th/0211182].
[26] S. Gurrieri and A. Micu, “Type IIB theory on half-flat manifolds,” [arXiv:hep-
     th/0212278].
[27] E. Goldstein and S. Prokushkin, “Geometric Model for Complex non-Kaehler Mani-
     folds with SU(3) Structure,” [arXiv:hep-th/0212307].
[28] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “A Large Mass Hierarchy from a Small Extra Dimension,”
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3370 (1999) [arXiv:hep-ph/9905221].
[29] J. Polchinski and A. Strominger, “New Vacua for Type II String Theory,” Phys. Lett.
     B 388, 736 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9510227].
[30] J. Michelson, “Compactifications of type IIB strings to four dimensions with non-
     trivial classical potential,” Nucl. Phys. B 495, 127 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9610151].
[31] G. Dall’Agata, “Type IIB Supergravity Compactified on a Calabi-Yau Manifold with
     H Fluxes,” JHEP 0111 005 (2001) [arXiv: hep-th/0107264].
[32] P. S. Aspinwall, “K3 Surfaces and String Duality,” [arXiv:hep-th/9611137].
[33] K. Becker, M. Becker, K. Dasgupta and P. Green, “Compactifications of Heterotic
     Theory on Non-Kähler Complex Manifolds: I”, [arXiv: hep-th/0301161].
[34] K. Dasgupta, D. P. Jatkar and S. Mukhi, “Gravitational Couplings and Z2 Orien-
     tifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B523, 465 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9707224] ;
     B. Stefanski, “Gravitational Couplings of D-branes and O-planes,” Nucl. Phys. B548,
     275 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9812088] ;
     J. F. Morales, C. A. Scrucca and M. Serone, “Anomalous Couplings for D-branes and
     O-planes,” Nucl. Phys. B552, 291 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9812071].

                                           50
[35] M. Grana and J. Polchinski, “Supersymmetric three-form flux perturbations on
     AdS(5),” Phys. Rev. D 63, 026001 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0009211].
[36] A. Strominger, “Superstrings With Torsion”, Nucl. Phys. B274 (1986) 253.
[37] T. Buscher, “Quantum Corrections and Extended Supersymmetry in New Sigma Mod-
     els”, Phys. Lett. B159 (1985) 127; “A Symmetry Of The String Background Field
     Equations”, Phys. Lett. B194 (1987) 59; “Path Integral Derivation of Quantum Du-
     ality in Nonlinear Sigma Models”, Phys. Lett. B201 (1988) 466.
[38] S. F. Hassan, “T-duality, space-time spinors and R-R fields in curved backgrounds,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 568, 145 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9907152].
[39] E. Bergshoeff, C. Hull and T. Ortin, “Duality in the type-II superstring effective
     action,” Nucl. Phys. B 451, 547 (1995).
[40] B. de Wit, D. J. Smit and N. D. Hari Dass, “Residual Supersymmetry Of Compactified
     D = 10 Supergravity”, Nucl. Phys. B283 (1987) 165 (1987).




                                           51
